
Claire Whitmell <http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/> is a Guardian contributor 
and a qualified business communication trainer

Networking is essential: If you're applying to an advertised vacancy, you'll 
face a lot of competition which means you'll need to stand out from the crowd. 
You can increase your chances by tailoring your CV and application materials to 
the role and the company, but probably the easiest way to stand out is through 
some old-fashioned networking.

Research how you can come to the attention of a hiring manager through 
personal referrals and online contacts (such as LinkedIn). Follow the company 
on Twitter, be in the same communities and groups. Find out what you can do for 
the company and how that will benefit them. If you can get a meeting with a 
decision-maker you get the chance to make an impression before you've even 
mentioned the word job.

Applying for roles when abroad: It's possible to get the ball rolling on a job 
hunt while you're outside the country. Researching career paths and roles is 
easy enough online. But if you're making applications, make sure you mention 
somewhere that you're relocating back to the UK and give a timeframe. You might 
also be able to conduct at least initial interviews via Skype.

Flight Lieutenant Emma Jenkins is a personnel officer with the RAF 
<http://www.raf.mod.uk/careers/>

Look out for similar roles to the one you want: For example, the RAF is not 
currently recruiting for weapon systems operator but you could consider a 
position as a logistics mover as this would involve planning, cargo centre 
operations, load preparation and aircraft loading/unloading.

Nigel Bicknell leads the strategic and commercial development of Guardian Jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/>

Practice makes perfect at interview: The more you practise, the more confident 
you should feel. Brainstorm possible questions and do a trial interview with a 
friend. Use your contacts to find someone who knows the company/sector and ask 
them what the current issues are.

Try and put the interviewer on the backfoot early by asking them questions. 
Take in material that shows how well you've researched the role and, of course, 
be ready to reel off not what you're good at, but how you can make a real 
difference in the role. That's what the line manager wants to hear. Obviously 
this doesn't mean you won't get a difficult question, but it does mean you're 
more likely to be in a position to answer it with increased confidence. 
Preparation really is all.

Matthew Smith has been a careers adviser at the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> for the past 
seven years

Blogging is a great way to get noticed: Blogging gets your name out there and 
helps you to build up contacts and start networking. It can be a challenge to 
fit your dream career around your commitments, but there's often more than one 
way into a role; developing new ideas could help you to explore what's possible.

Hannah Morton Hedges 10 years' experience as a careers adviser and now runs 
Momentum Careers Advice <http://www.momentumcareersadvice.com/>

Sometimes you have to take a step back to move forward: Every situation is 
different but on the whole most people do have to take a bit of a step back in 
terms of salary package, before they can move forward. For this reason it's 
very important to view career change as a long-term process.

Training programmes that are more structured, such as graduate trainee roles, 
tend to have fixed salaries with little or no flexibility. A speculative job 
search may allow you a little more power to negotiate on salary, however, by 
using your transferable skills and experience to appeal to employers.

Make the most out of LinkedIn: Too many people simply post a profile, sit back 
and expect wonderful things to happen. Make sure you are getting as much as you 
can out of the groups: join groups with shared professional interests and get 
involved in conversations.

Flexibility is essential when dealing with temping agencies: Success in using 
temping agencies often comes down to your success in building a good 
relationship with them. You need to be the first person they think of when a 
new assignment comes in. It is much easier to be that person if you've had the 
opportunity to meet them face-to-face. Be prepared to take on anything and 
everything at first to prove yourself as a reliable worker. Nudge them 
occasionally on the phone (not too much though).

Innovative applications work better in certain industries: It's hard to 
predict how unconventional approaches will be received by employers. That said, 
in the current job market, trying different ways to get noticed is often the 
only option to gain cut-through.

Adam Pacitti recently used his last £500 to advertise himself for employment 
on a billboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/shortcuts/2013/jan/07/do-job-hunting-stunts-work>
. Less drastic methods, such as video or infographic CVs, seem to be making a 
fairly positive impact on some employers right now – although for just how much 
longer they will be seen as being original, who knows.

Steve Nicholls is a career development coach who specialises in helping 
executives and managers forge meaningful careers

Think outside the box to make a change: Research the various roles and network 
with those already employed your chosen sector – buy them a coffee, pick their 
brains. This will help you to refine your ideas and decide on exactly the type 
of role you want. Try to get a voluntary role or two to test and refine your 
ambitions. Give yourself time, but also give yourself a specific goal, with a 
specific date for completion.

Sian Case is a job-search coach and the author of Nail That Job, the complete 
guide for the less-experienced jobseeker 
<http://www.nailthatjob.co.uk/portfolio/nail-that-job-the-book>

If you're thinking of relocating, you must be clear on why: How far are you 
prepared to relocate and are there any areas of the country you'd prefer to go 
to and really want to avoid? Clarifying where you want to be focuses your job 
search. Why do you think you'll need to relocate? You're the only person who 
can decide if the change is worth it – how much do you want to change jobs?

Deciding what to do next: The first step is to clear the wood from the trees 
and then you'll find what you want to research for your next role. At the end 
of your next really wonderful day at work, brainstorm what you enjoy and hate 
about your current job. Stick the notes up on two separate doors in your house 
and leave them for a few days. On your next really bad day, repeat the exercise 
and see if there is any change. This will help you to see the pros and cons of 
changing or staying more clearly.

Denise Taylor is a chartered psychologist, an award-winning career coach with 
Amazing People <http://www.amazingpeople.co.uk/#&panel1-1>

Changing without taking a pay cut: Consider why you want to change career and 
what you would like to do instead? Research the requirements for a particular 
job. Be honest, how well do you match up? In the current economic climate, 
employers want people who are a very close if not perfect match. You may not 
have to take a significant pay cut but it depends how well you match up and 
what else you can offer.

Simon Gray is a chartered accountant and author of Super Secrets of the 
Successful Jobseeker 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857192486>

Make direct approaches: Make the job boards part of your strategy but also 
approach the businesses you would like to work for when they aren't recruiting. 
We have created jobs for good people who approached us directly even though we 
hadn't advertised in the market.

Mildred Talabi is the founder of CV Makeover Expert 
<http://www.cvmakeoverexpert.com/>

When to disclose illness to a potential employer: I think this works on a 
need-to-know basis. If the past illness is likely to affect your performance in 
the future job in any way, then it's better to declare it sooner rather than 
later. If it's a challenge you've overcome then there's no need to bring it up 
– unless you have gaps in your career history as a result, in which case you 
should mention it on your CV (not specifically but with a general statement 
like "medical reasons") and then be upfront about it at the interview stage.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Careers 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/> in association with the RAF 
<http://www.raf.mod.uk/careers/>. Produced by Guardian Professional. Paid for 
by the RAF. All editorial controlled and overseen by the Guardian.
 