
Academics are today calling on the government to abandon plans to introduce a 
new maths A-level, labelling it "weak" and "mindless", and claiming it will not 
prepare pupils to study maths at university.

The new A-level, called "use of mathematics", risks "cannibalising" the 
subject and will only appeal to students from lower-performing schools, the 
group of 58 maths professors said in a report compiled by the right-of-centre 
thinktank, Reform. The new exam is "not of A-level standard", they say.

A consultation on the new A-level closes today and it is due to be introduced 
to schools in September 2011. It was designed to encourage more young people to 
do maths but the professors, calling themselves Educators for Reform, today 
argue that it is part of a move towards exams based on "widening participation" 
instead of academic rigour.

They claim that it could mislead some pupils in lower-performing schools who 
might do the exam hoping to go on to study maths at university when it is 
inadequate preparation. The exam is designed to be taken alongside other 
subjects so that they are proficient in using maths as it applies to economics 
or sociology, but it is not intended as a route to study maths on its own. An 
AS-level in the use of mathematics already exists.

One of the academics, Professor Nick Shepherd-Barron at Cambridge University, 
said: "As far as the A-level is concerned, creativity has been not just hidden 
but lost. Instead, mathematics is presented as a mindless exercise in the 
execution of routines."

The academics claim the new A-level will worsen the maths teacher shortage, 
"cannibalise" the subject by encouraging young people to take the "easier" 
option and mislead students who want to study maths at university.

In particular, they claim the compulsory algebra and calculus units are far 
below the level of difficulty of the equivalent units in the straight maths 
A-level.

The report says universities will continue to require the ordinary maths 
A-level. It says: "Students attending schools – usually in the poorest areas – 
that do not have a detailed knowledge of university admission policies will be 
unaware of this.

"Some university admissions tutors have already had to turn away bright 
students whose teachers (wrongly) believed that a grade A in AS-level use of 
mathematics was appropriate preparation for subjects requiring a high degree of 
mathematical literacy."

A spokesman for the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority, which is 
organising the consultation, said: "It is too early for us to comment on the 
final specifications of the new mathematics A-level and AS-level 
qualifications. QCA is committed to ensuring that all A-level and AS-level 
qualifications meet the needs of all students and are fit for purpose."
 