
After a career mostly spent in academia and government, Lord (Terry) Burns was 
very much the businessman rather than the showman when hisappointment as 
chairman was confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/05/lord-burns-channel-4-chairman> 
last week. With no personal press officer, he expressed his delight in a 
statement about "a time of great change … in the communications sector" in 
which "Channel 4 has a very special and continuing role to play."

So, who is the man who is about to direct the future of the state-owned 
broadcaster? And, more importantly, where will he take an advertising-supported 
company that has flirted with public funding and private takeover?

A former permanent secretary at the Treasury who once chaired Marks & Spencer 
and now chairs Abbey National, Burns is a liberal economist who believes firmly 
in competition. Yet those who groan over the choice of an establishment, white, 
male figure to head the once-maverick broadcaster, which launched 27 years ago 
this month, may be missing a central point.Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>, struggling to redeem itself in the 
eyes of a Conservative leadership that has called for its abolition, wanted, 
and found, a big hitter, a safe pair of hands, and an ultra-experienced 
chairman with support on both sides of parliament.

Corporate deal

That need for a "traditional" chairman to present a united case to government 
is what existing C4 board members – wearied by the past and the quixotic 
entrepreneurLuke Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lukejohnson>, 
outgoing chairman – told the new head of Ofcom, Colette Bowe, in one-to-one 
sessions this autumn. Tim Gardam, a former director of programmes at C4, was 
also on the Ofcom appointment panel, which used the former imcumbent Sir 
Michael Bishop, the founder of the airline BMI, as a model for a successful C4 
chairman.

Burns's appointment was widely welcomed by an industry enjoying the search for 
leaders of ITV as well as C4, and most believed the appointment would bring an 
end to rumours that C4 could be forced into a corporate deal.

Charged with a series of reviews since joining the Lords in 1998, Burns's most 
significant previous brush with the industry was to chair a review of the BBC's 
charter in 2006. Significantly, he called for consideration to be given to both 
ITV and C4 sharing a "larger pot" of BBC licence fee money for public service 
broadcasting under proposals for a new governance structure for the 
corporation. Lord (John) Birt, the former director general of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> who has been a close friend of Burns 
since they worked together on ITV's Weekend World, stresses his friend's 
knowledge and understanding of public institutions: "He is a man of enormous 
intellect and sophistication ... and he is a real public service animal."

Others play down the suggestion that Burns is hardly a natural fit for a 
channel designed to be edgy, adding that the ardent QPR fan is a "technogeek", 
was the first of his friends to use the web and is always keen to adopt the 
latest gadget.

Survival prospects

Burns worked for every Conservative chancellor from 1981 until leaving soon 
after Gordon Brown's arrival at the Treasury in 1998, yet he is noted for an 
ability to get on with both sides of the house. The cross-bencher "moves 
seamlessly between the upper levels of both parties", says one admiring peer of 
a man they call "Teflon Tel". Austin Mitchell, the Labour MP and chair of the 
All Party Parliamentary media group, called Burns "impressive", saying "Channel 
4 now is all about its financial situation and survival prospects, which I hope 
can be achieved without top slicing the BBC licence fee," while John McVay, the 
chief executive of Pact, the producers' organisation, agrees: "Burns will know 
how to keepChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> out of the 
[Treasury's] for-sale book."

So what is at the top of the new chairman's overflowing in-tray? His first 
urgent task is to appoint a chief executive. Ofcom is in a penitent mood over 
the unsuccessful pairing of Johnson withAndy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, so Burns has joined immediately 
as chairman-designate. He will work five days a month for £100,000, rather than 
Johnson's £75,000 for fewer days, and it will be interesting to see how this 
former London Business School professor deals with the controversial topic of 
executive pay. Duncan's rewards are a source of fury and Kevin Lygo's £1.1m 
salary as director of television compares with an average level for staffers of 
£72,000 last year. Many industry pundits believe he needs someone with more 
digital and/or creative experience as his chief executive. Gavyn Davies, a 
former chairman of the BBC and a firm fan of Burns, says: "He needs a very 
strong editorial figure."

As factual output is a C4 strength, a chief executive with a news and current 
affairs training may have an advantage. When a row blew up over Celebrity Big 
Brother in January 2007, no one was on hand to give an editorial lead and 
public response. Although friendly and voluble in private, Burns largely avoids 
much press involvement, something that will have to change.Sir Peter Burt's 
tenure at ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/oct/06/itv.television> is 
evidence of what happens when financiers try to shun the limelight if they are 
running a broadcaster.

Swan song

Burns must also decide whether C4 can go it alone, or must strike partnership 
deals to help plug a funding gap it has been bleating about for much of the 
past two years. After cutting its programme budget back to £530m a year, equal 
to its 2002 level, Duncan warned that C4 may have to cut a further £35m from 
its costs if advertising continues to decline in his swan songappearance before 
the Lords Communications Committee last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/04/bbc-more-help-channel-4>.

Neither Duncan or Johnson have been able to do a transformative deal or gain 
anything from a year of talks withBBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide>. Few on the board believe 
that a big bang solution, such as buying Virgin Media's £355m stake in UKTV, is 
workable.

Yet on the upside, C4 has a 12% audience share, compared with its original 
target of 10%, thanks to a 4% contribution from its digital channels. Many 
analysts believe the decision to ditch its pay channels, and pursue only 
free-to-air options, one made by Duncan back in 2004, has to be revisited. 
Given his history of diplomacy (a strained two years at Marks & Spencer 
notwithstanding), Burns is expected to take a pragmatic approach. He may even 
try to reopen the issue of public funding, ruled out byDigital Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/digital-britain>.

In his autobiography, Birt describes how Burns counselled him when a big BBC 
reform ran into opposition: "Don't drive at a brick wall, drive around it." 
Another source says: "You should not overlook the scope for getting a lot of 
small things right."

The deal with YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube>, making 
C4 programmes available on the platform from next year, is seen by Ofcom as 
very significant. Other issues include improving revenue from programme rights 
and format ownership. Overhanging all of this is a desperately needed drive 
towards creative renewal, which could result in a big relaunch of C4 in 2011.

Several board members tell Ofcom they are concerned at the way that there has 
been so little change in powerful jobs. Although C4 was founded on the notion 
of five-year stints for commissioners, there is growing support for a clearout 
of people groomed to say no to new ideas.

Julian Bellamy <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julianbellamy>, C4's head of 
programming, last week sketched out the ways in which the cancellation of Big 
Brother in 2010 offers a great opportunity, partly by freeing up £50m for new 
programmes.Here, an optimist may just see the faint outlines of a new era for 
C4, while cynics, looking at its schedules and diminishing distinctiveness, 
could reply it is too early for optimism.

Bellamy, in a speech that appeared to reject the mini-BBC ideal of Duncan's 
ambition, chose to look at controversial past programming such as Brass Eye to 
explain this vision – specifically its programme mocking the public alarm over 
paedophilia – as well as Queer As Folk, Ali G and the live Autopsy: Life and 
Death.

There are signs of changed priorities. C4 is waving goodbye to Paul O'Grady 
but has signed up Mary Portas, the BBC's Queen of Shops. There is talk of more 
entertaining programmes at 9pm, more drama, and a new sort of soap opera.

One board member says there is no choice but to change direction. "C4 is on 
its own now. It has to make the most of the advertising model. The route out if 
you like is to provide better quality programmes with edginess and without 
public funding."

Whether or not Burns has the stomach, or even the understanding, for radical 
and perhaps uncomfortable change, remains to be seen. If not, Colette Bowe, a 
fellow economist and an acquaintance of Burns, will have failed her first big 
test as the chair of Ofcom.

Who will be Burns's chief executive?

Lorraine Heggessey A strong contender, she has been chief executive of indy 
producer Talkback Thames since 2004, employing around 350 people, handling The 
Apprentice, The X Factor, Britain's Got Talent, Grand Designs, The Bill, etc. 
Trained as BBC news and current affairs journalist, worked on Panorama, 
Newsnight, ran BBC children's TV, controller BBC1 2000-2004.

Peter Fincham Runner-up for the job in 2004. ITV director of television since 
2008, controller BBC1, 2005-2007, a job he was forced out after "Queengate". A 
seasoned, independently wealthy all-round professional, good with talent. 
Fincham was a co-founder of Talkback. He executive-produced some of Channel 4's 
most iconic shows of the 1990s, from Ali G to Brass Eye.

Kevin Lygo Director of television at C4, and architect of much of its success 
over the past 12 years in entertainment. Lygo has kept serious public service 
strands, such as Dispatches and Unreported World, in peak slots but he may be 
handicapped by the strains between the top team at C4 over the past five years.

David Abraham Chief executive since 2007 of UKTV – the array of channels, 
subscription and free-to-air, jointly owned by the BBC andVirgin Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/virginmedia>. He extensively rebranded the 
once clunkily-named channels, having startling success with Dave, which gained 
8 million viewers. He previously ran Discovery Networks USA's TLC and general 
channels, and was a founder in the 1990s of the ad agency St Lukes, which won 
awards and prominence for its New Deal for the Unemployed campaign, and work on 
Ikea, Clarks, Sky Digital launch and Eurostar.

Ed Richards An LSE-trained economist, the Ofcom chief executive since 2006, 
and former No 10 media policy adviser has led the reviews of public service 
broadcasting and has a deep knowledge of the industry. A large part of the C4 
chief executive's job in recent years has been lobbying for support in top 
political circles. But this may change in an era of self-help.

Jane Root Currently an independent producer, formerly the head of Discovery 
Channel, 2004-2007. As the controller of BBC2, 1997-2004, she is credited with 
introducing successful lifestyle strands, as well as Who Do You Think You Are?. 
She is the co-founder of the independent producer, Wall to Wall and understands 
Channel 4's ethos.MB

For the latest lowdown on candidates for this and the top jobs at ITV see 
MediaGuardian's Big Cheese Chart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/series/big-cheese-chart>
 