
The bomb that exploded in Manhattan’s Chelsea district on Saturday night was 
placed in a dumpster belonging the city’s only dedicated residence for blind 
people. Amazingly, none of more than 500 residents who live at Selis Manor at 
135 West 23rd St were injured, despite windows facing the street being blown 
out and scaffolding and wooden construction barriers outside the building 
collapsing.


Many residents, it turned out, were mostly playing bingo in a conference room 
not directly facing the blast.

Suspect in New York bombing arrested after shootout with police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
“Fortunately, no one was in the second, third and fourth floor apartments that 
had their windows blown out at the time of the blast,” said Nancy Miller, 
director of Visions, the charity that manages the apartments for blind people 
or visually impaired residents.

“It’s more anxiety-provoking because the tenants cannot see what’s happening 
on the street and they didn’t know what caused the blast,” Miller said. “They 
reacted just as anyone would because with the building shaking they didn’t know 
if it was an earthquake or what it was.”

Smoke from the blast filled the hallways, prompting emergency services to shut 
down the elevators. Power in the building was maintained so the residents were 
able to receive information, just as the general public did.

“There were a lot of rumors flying, because people didn’t know what had 
happened so they needed to tune into some kind of information,” Miller said. 
“This is a very independent, resourceful group of blind individuals – not a 
group of very dependent people.”

Some 205,000 blind or visually impaired people live in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, and Selis Manor is the 
city’s only dedicated residence for blind people. In the aftermath of the 
detonation, they did not lack for social service and government attention.

Miller said she was contacted by the city government, the department for the 
ageing, the commissioner of the mayor’s office for people with disabilities, 
the associate commissioner of the commission for blind people, the 
comptroller’s office, Manhattan borough president Gayle Brewer and city 
councilmember Corey Johnson. “All were in touch with me to find out if there 
was anything that could be done.”

One of the immediate concerns was for the guide dogs – there are about 100 in 
the building – because they, of course, need to go out. “At first, the police 
would not let anyone leave the building,” Miller said. “Finally, they prevailed 
on the police to let them let their dogs out to do their business.”
 