
Schoolgirls in New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> are 
skipping class because they cannot afford sanitary pads and are being forced to 
use phonebooks, newspapers and rags to make-do during menstruation.

In the last three months local charity KidsCan distributed 4,000 sanitary 
items to more than 500 low-income schools nationwide after they were given a 
NZ$25,000 (USD$18,000) government grant to begin to address the issue.

Because KidsCan buy in bulk, they are able to purchase packs of sanitary 
products for around NZ$1 – instead of the NZ$4-8 that supermarkets usually 
charge. Sanitary products are taxed in New Zealand.

How New Zealand's rich-poor divide killed its egalitarian paradise | Max 
Rashbrooke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/12/how-new-zealands-rich-poor-divide-killed-its-egalitarian-paradise>
Vaughan Couillault, principal of Papatoetoe high school in south Auckland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/auckland>, said it was a “serious concern” 
that many of his 700 female students from lower socio-economic backgrounds 
could not afford the products to manage their monthly cycle hygienically.

This year KidsCan started supplying the school with sanitary items, but before 
that his staff would make regular trips to the supermarket to buy sanitary 
supplies, and charge female students 50 cents to cover costs. According to 
Couillault, at other low-income schools in New Zealand teachers buy students 
sanitary products using their own money.
Sarah Kull, a school nurse at Papatoetoe, said since the 50 cent charge was 
removed the number of students approaching her for sanitary products had 
increased to around 10-15 pupils each day. Half of them needed one-off items 
and half were stocking up to cater for their entire period.

“There is a shame factor involved in asking for help with such an intimate 
part of your life, and I think the girls we see approaching us are just the tip 
of the iceberg,” said Kull.

“A lot of girls are too embarrassed to ask. We also have about the same number 
each day come to us for pain relief related to their periods. Paracetamol is 
cheaper than pads but there is still a cost involved, which for many students 
from low-income families is unmanageable.”

Labour MP Louisa Wall is spear-heading the campaign to draw attention to 
school-age girls who can’t afford the average NZ$5-15 (USD$3-10) a month for 
sanitary items. She has also been told of women in hospital who have been 
unable to access sanitary items, and that many female university students 
struggle to pay to cover their periods.

“Local schools started coming to me and saying: ‘We need help with this’. 
Girls are skipping class and sports because they can’t afford the sanitary 
items that make their periods a normal part of life,” she said.
“This issue is still taboo and we really need to start addressing it because 
sanitary items are not a luxury – they are a basic necessity. Not being able to 
afford them is holding many girls and women back, and I am especially concerned 
about them missing out on education because of their periods. “

 