
It's not an exact science but there are certain types of film that could be 
considered New York genres. The witty, neurotic comedy of social and sexual 
manners might be considered one of the more venerable examples; the hard-knock 
coming-of-age story could be another. More recent additions might include the 
lo-fi me-against-the-city ordeal narrative, in which an isolated subject is 
observed in the practice of some Sisyphean undertaking, and documentaries 
engaged in what a friend of mine calls "crack nostalgia" – a romantic 
appreciation for one aspect or another of New York's cultural life in the years 
before the Giuliani-era cleanup tidied its streets and blunted its edges.

All of the above can be found at this year's Brooklyn international film 
festival, which runs until 14 June. The event was inaugurated in 1998 to plug a 
gap in the city's cinematic calendar for a competitive festival with an 
internationally-focused programme. Its growth has been substantial: where in 
1998 the programmers had 145 feature submissions to choose from, this year they 
waded through around 2,800 from more than 100 countries. A good 40% of its 
lineup, however, remains locally-produced – perhaps no surprise given that, as 
the festival's executive director Marco Ursino puts it, "in New York, one out 
of three people is a film-maker".

The festival's opening film, Breaking Upwards, could be described as this 
season's take on the neurotic New Yorker romantic comedy. Following young 
twentysomething lovers Daryl (Daryl Wein) and Zoe (Zoe Lister-Jones) as they 
set about dismantling their four-year relationship through an ostensibly 
hyper-rational negotiated system of "off days", it offers a balance of genre 
standards – non-stop one-liners, over-involved Jewish families, pervasive 
smugness – and up-to-the-minute ingredients. These range from the incidental, 
such as worries about appropriate use of Google Chat and Facebook, to the 
structural: the film grew out of a series of real-life experiments undertaken 
by Wein and Lister-Jones, who not only play versions of themselves but between 
them juggle writing, producing, directing, editing and songwriting duties. With 
forays into sexual experimentation and polyamory, the results sometimes feel 
like a West Village boho PG-13 take on theShortbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/113856/shortbus> approach, albeit with 
considerably less aesthetic, emotional or sexual bite.

Like Breaking Upwards, this year's walk on the mean streets goes by a 
perplexingly clever-clever title. Falling Awake is the story of Jay (Andrew 
Cisneros), a post-adolescent living at home in the Bronx, trying to balance 
family stress, troubles with a rival gang, a burgeoning romance and musical 
aspirations. There's little novel in single-named director and co-writer 
Agustin's story of limited options and lessons learned: the characters remain 
stock types (no-nonsense dad, Mercutio-esque best friend) and the 
cycle-of-violence plot is familiarly predisposed to what love interest 
Alessandra (Jenna Dewan) recognises as "stupid macho bullshit". But the 
performances are engaging, particularly Cisneros – imagine a Latino Jake 
Gyllenhaal – who remains watchable whether singing, fighting or emoting. 
There's nice location use, too, of the 6 line on the subway, snaking from the 
Bronx down through Manhattan and out to Brooklyn.

Sea Legs offers another entry in the recent cycle of city-ordeal narratives, 
whose most accomplished exponents includeRamin Bahrani (Man Push Cart, Chop 
Shop) <https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/mar/04/ramin-bahrani> and 
Ronald Bronstein (Frownland) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/21/frownland>. Like their films, 
Craig Butta's feature stays close to the ground, formally speaking; its 
compositions stay yoked to its central character's perspective just as his 
psychological state remains the central concern. Butta himself stars – he also 
wrote and edited the film – as teacher Ritchie whose father dies, leaving him a 
semi-abandoned fairground game stall on the Coney Island boardwalk. Deciding in 
his arbitrary grief to try running the place, Ritchie struggles to maintain his 
dignity and indeed sanity. The subtly impressionistic location photography, 
shot in an iconic New York zone whose future is in serious doubt, adds to the 
sense of disorientation and disintegration.

The passing of aspects of the city's culture has also been good fodder lately 
for a series of feature documentaries, fromMarcin Ramocki's Brooklyn DIY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/feb/25/brooklyn-diy>, about the 
Williamsburg art scene of the 90s, to several entries atthis year's Tribeca 
film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/may/07/tribeca-film-festival>. 
Like those titles, Diary of a Times Square Thief is enthralled by the scuzzy 
fringes of pre-Giuliani Manhattan but offers a genuinely fresh and compelling 
approach. Its Dutch director Klaas Bense, whose first film this is, came across 
an intriguing journal on eBay, a scrapbook-confession of flophouse life in the 
80s by a failed would-be writer with a voice somewhere between William S 
Burroughs and Travis Bickle. Coming to New York, Bense tracks down some of 
those mentioned in the diary as he tries to find its author. The thoughts and 
memories he collects are various, touching, insightful and beautifully 
presented. The overall mood is one of generosity, humility and acceptance – a 
tone more in keeping, perhaps with the film's backers, the Buddhist 
Broadcasting Foundation, than its location. It's not often you hear a New 
Yorker say the words spoken by the final interviewee: "If I were to romanticise 
my story, er … I won't."
 