
The championship of the online newspaper world changed hands the other day. The
New York Times(as measured by comScore, currently the most fashionable 
collector of digital evidence extant) had 44.8m unique visitors in December, 
while our own dearDaily Mail had 45.3m. Manhattan's "grey lady" doesn't rule 
the global web world any longer. A hundred years on, the heirs of Alfred 
Harmsworth are sticking it to the Yanks – boasting about "reinventing popular 
journalism for the digital era".

As with almost any bold claim, there are nuances. Digital statistics are 
damnably variable according to the rules you count by (theMail has an even more 
mind-boggling 84m uniques on the latest ABCe releases). TheNYT thinks the Mail 
counts too many peripheral figures for comfort – and anyway "it is not in our 
competitive set", according to a slightly sniffy spokesman. But, given its 
remarkable rise from zero to hero over a mere five years, there's reason to 
concentrate hard one more time on whatMail Online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> is doing and what its 
frontier-busting salience portends.

We sometimes talk about print newspapers in Britain as though they were all 
the same, just parts of the "press". But theDaily Star and FT, for example, are 
miles apart in aim, aspiration and resource. (TheStar has just 57 journalists). 
In the online world, such differences are inevitably replicated.

The New York Times, partly concealed behind a paywall that curbs its reader 
traffic growth, runs a full-service print paper and an even fuller-service 
website. Its editorial staff is zealously integrated: theoretically, almost 
everyone does everything. Its internet presence is a natural extension of its 
newsprint history. Though it does not yet quite talk the talk of "digital 
first" – looking forward, like the Journal Register group in the US or the
Guardian here in Britain, to the days when dead trees are left to lie and 
paperless news organisations bestride the net – it is, nevertheless, envisaging 
a certain sort of future: one where everything changes, everything is up for 
grabs.

But keep looking towards that future, because operating so ambitiously online 
is a cash drain, not a cash cow, for the moment. TheNew York Times, pushing its 
cover price up to $2.50 a copy, bidding a sudden farewell to its CEO and 
grinding through more redundancy toils, hasn't exactly found sunlit uplands or 
revenue models as yet.

Britain's new world champion, by contrast, sees things in another light. It 
rejects any form of print and online integration. It runs its online operation 
under an editor – Martin Clarke – who's free to produce a digital version that, 
by the end of a working day, bears almost no similarity to what Paul Dacre 
ordains for print. "A good story's a good story – particularly a good human 
story", Clarke tells his growing American audience. But he doesn't try to break 
the bank when he tells it.

The mothership Mail Online office in Kensington has only 25 seats and 
terminals. In New York, there are 20 staff people, nine in Los Angeles (most of 
them buying celebrity pictures). You're not talking huge wage bills, or (inNYT 
mode) striving to slim 1,250 journalists down to 1,000. Mail numbers keep early 
losses under control and let profits flow more easily; the Huffington Post, 
remember, took off with 50 staff. Mail Online, even before its current American 
surge, made £15m profit last year.

Yet keep taking that old Daily Star/FT medicine: keep thinking differences, 
some of them profound. Dacre'sDaily Mail, with 4.5 million UK readers every 
weekday morning, isn't anticipating giving up the print ghost any decade soon. 
On the contrary, like its closest rival, theTelegraph, which also claims to 
make profits online, it reckons on staying in print business for as far as a 
managerial eye can see. In one sense, it's a leader of the digital pack. In 
another sense, it is hanging back, keeping options open.

That's not where the New York Times stands. Nor is it yet quite "digital 
first", which, in Journal Register terms, means print somewhere towards the 
disappearing rear.

But then those cavernous old differences keep opening again. Maybe this 
month's world champion will be history in five years' time as the net's thirst 
for celebrity photos is slaked. Maybe – as pondered in a recent Communication 
Management group survey – the decline in print sales will plateau out for a 
while. Maybe theMail model and the NYT model can both win through in the end. 
Maybe theMail's celebs can't draw the ads. Maybe missionary zeal and cautious 
calculation can exist side by side.

Keep saying "maybe" time and again. And remember, amid all this "we are the 
greatest" stuff, to keep sucking your thumb while you do.
 