
New Year’s Eve partygoers are being urged to avoid cheap fake booze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/10/counterfeit-traders-demand-cheap-booze>
 containing potentially lethal ingredients found in antifreeze.


The warning in the run-up to the UK’s biggest drinking night of the year comes 
from theLocal Government Association (LGA) <http://www.local.gov.uk/>, which 
represents more than 370 councils in England and Wales. It follows recent 
council seizures of counterfeit vodka laced with highly dangerous chemicals 
found in cleaning products and paint solvent.

After a series of raids on suspect premises leading up to New Year’s Eve, 
council trading standards teams are also warning sellers of illegal alcohol 
that they face confiscation of their stock, prosecution and being stripped of 
any relevant licences.

As people stock up on alcohol at home and attend major celebrations in towns 
and city centres, councils are issuing safety advice to help people avoid harm 
from dangerous alcohol containing lethal chemicals such as chloroform – which 
can induce comas – and high levels of methanol which is a key ingredient in 
antifreeze. Drinking the bogus booze can lead to vomiting, permanent blindness, 
and kidney or liver problems, and can be fatal in extreme cases.

 The LGA is urging shoppers to look out for telltale signs of fake booze. 
These include unfamiliar names or names mimicking recognised brands, crooked 
labels, spelling mistakes, and very low prices that seem “too good to be true”. 
Drinkers being served vodka in pubs and clubs should also smell the drinks as 
fake vodka will often smell of nail varnish.

“New Year’s Eve is the biggest drinking night of the year but people need to 
avoid suspiciously cheap, fake alcohol at all costs because it could seriously 
harm your health, and even kill you,” said Simon Blackburn, a councillor and 
chair of the LGA’s Safer and Stronger Communities Board.

“Counterfeit alcohol also harms legitimate traders and threatens livelihoods, 
with the black market trade helping to fund organised criminal gangs. Council 
trading standards teams have been cracking down on businesses selling fake 
alcohol and rogue sellers should think twice about stocking these dangerous 
drinks as we will always seek to prosecute irresponsible traders.”

In a prosecution <http://www4.halton.gov.uk/News/Lists/Posts/Post.aspx?ID=1180>
 brought by Halton borough council, a taxi driver had his vehicle seized and 
was given a suspended sentence after counterfeit vodka was found in his taxi. 
Twenty-six litres of fake vodka – found to be unfit for human consumption – and 
108 bottles of illicit wine were seized following a search of a storage unit.

Separately, Lincolnshire county council’s trading standards officers helped 
seize 
<https://www.lincolnshire.gov.uk/news/illicit-tobacco-and-alcohol-seized-in-lincolnshire/130260.article>
 3,570 litres of beers, wines and spirits – most believed to be counterfeit – 
from 20 premises as part of an operation with police and HMRC.

Drinking industrial-strength isopropanol – which is more commonly found in 
antifreeze, lotions and cosmetics – can lead to dizziness, vomiting, 
anaesthesia and even blindness, and can leave someone in a coma. Other 
substances found in fake bottles of spirits include ethyl acetate, which is 
normally found in glues, nail polish removers and cigarettes, and can lead to 
organ damage.

 