
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> will 
take their time over appointing a manager and John Carver may remain in 
caretaker charge for not only Saturday’s trip to Chelsea but also the home game 
against Southampton the following week.

Although Newcastle remain interested in Rémi Garde and are understood to have 
made contact with the former Lyon manager and Arsenal defensive midfielder, 
other candidates are being considered.

It seems certain Alan Pardew’s successor will be from overseas after Steve 
McClaren pledged his loyalty to Derby County. Newcastle regarded the former 
England and Middlesbrough manager as a strong contender but McClaren’s comments 
seem to have ruled out any possibility of his re-locating to Tyneside.

The BBC pundit and former Newcastle caretaker-manager Alan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> has hinted that a “small 
part” of him wonders whether Mike Ashley, the club’s owner, had encouraged 
Pardew to depart for Crystal Palace after telling him he would shortly be 
putting up the “sold” signs at St James’ Park.

Although this theory is contradicted by emphatic denials from the club that 
Ashley, who recently said he would not consider selling until the summer of 
2016 at the earliest, is preparing for a sale, Shearer does not seem entirely 
convinced.

“I don’t know what [Ashley’s intentions for the club are] because he never 
tells us anything,” he said during a BBC interview. “He doesn’t speak to anyone 
but there’s a small part of me that thinks he might have givenAlan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> a nod.”

Quite apart from Newcastle’s insistence that Ashley’s statement about 
remaining in control for at least 18 months remains accurate, offloading a 
football clubs is – as Aston Villa’s owner, Randy Lerner, has discovered – 
difficult.

There are other plausible explanations behind Pardew’s departure. “It did make 
me laugh when I heard people saying that Alan wouldn’t leave Newcastle to go to 
Crystal Palace,” Shearer said. “There’s a million reasons why Alan would leave 
Newcastle to go to Crystal Palace: he’d be on a better salary at a club where 
the fans would want him, he would buy and sell the players he wanted. There’s 
three very good reasons to start with. That’s where Newcastle are as a club, 
I’m afraid. Not good news but we’re used to that.”
 