


With Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> 
determined to take their time over appointing a manager, John Carver is 
expected to continue in caretaker charge for not only Saturday’s trip to 
Chelsea but the home game against Southampton the following weekend.

Although Newcastle remain interested in Rémi Garde and are understood to have 
made informal contact with the former Lyon manager and Arsenal defensive 
midfielder, other candidates cannot be discounted. These include Thomas Tuchel, 
the former Mainz coach, and Saint-Étienne’s Christophe Galtier. Both are 
believed to be under consideration.

As things stand, Lee Charnley, the club’s managing director, and Graham Carr, 
the chief scout – the duo the club’s owner,Mike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, has placed in charge of the 
recruitment process – hope to be in a position to announce an Ashley-approved 
head coach shortly after the Southampton game.

With Newcastle out of the FA Cup this would mean the new man will have the 
best part of a fortnight to work with his squad before the trip to Hull City at 
the end of January.

It seems virtually certain Alan Pardew’s successor will be imported from 
abroad after Steve McClaren pledged his loyalty to Derby County on Tuesday and 
Eddie Howe on Wednesday said he would not contemplate leaving the Championship 
leaders, Bournemouth.

Newcastle regarded McClaren as a strong contender but the former England and 
Middlesbrough manager’s comments appear to have ruled out any possibility of 
his relocating to Tyneside.

Although Howe was seen as more of an outsider, his name is believed to have 
featured on Newcastle’s longlist. Not that the 37-year-old was ever prepared to 
consider walking out on Bournemouth’s attempt to reach the Premier League.

“It’s flattering but I have no interest in other jobs,” Howe said. “I love the 
job I’m doing here.”

Alan Shearer <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> has hinted he 
wondered whether Ashley had encouraged Pardew to depart for Crystal Palace 
after possibly telling him he would shortly be putting the sold signs up at St 
James’ Park in order to pursue his increasingly complicated involvement with 
Rangers.

Although this theory is contradicted by emphatic denials from Newcastle that 
Ashley, who recently said he would not consider selling up on Tyneside until 
the summer of 2016 at the very earliest, is preparing for a sale, Shearer did 
not seem entirely convinced.

“I don’t know what [Ashley’s intentions for the club are] because he never 
tells us anything,” said the former Newcastle striker and caretaker manager in 
a BBC interview. “He doesn’t speak to anyone but there’s a small part of me 
that thinks he might have givenAlan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> a nod.”

Quite apart from Newcastle’s insistence that Ashley’s statement about 
remaining in control for at least the next 18 months remains accurate, 
offloading football clubs is difficult.

Moreover, as Shearer pointed out, there are several other plausible 
explanations for Pardew’s defection. “It did make me laugh when I heard people 
saying that Alan wouldn’t leave Newcastle to go to Crystal Palace,” he said.

“There’s a million reasons why Alan would leave Newcastle to go to Crystal 
Palace: he’d be on a better salary at a club where the fans would want him, he 
would buy and sell the players he wanted. There’s four very good reasons to 
start with. That’s where Newcastle are as a club I’m afraid. Not good news but 
we’re used to that.”
 