
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> are 
adamant the ripping down of the iconic "Shearer's" sign at the entrance to the 
St James' Park bar named after the club's former striker is not connected to 
Alan Shearer's scathing deconstruction of Joe Kinnear's appointment as director 
of football.

Club officials said the wrecking crew began work on Wednesday, hours before 
Shearer's caustic comments were published. "It's purely coincidence," the 
official said, explaining that the decision to revamp the popular venue 
situated beneath the Gallowgate End was taken some time ago.

However, the fact that, eight and a half years after its opening, the bar is 
to be renamed "Nine" 
<http://www.nufc.co.uk/articles/20130620/shearers-redevelopment-set-to-raise-bar_2281670_3215376>
 will inevitably be interpreted as a slight on the former England centre 
forward. Newcastle say Shearer has been kept abreast of developments and did 
not object to the switch to "Nine".

John Irving, Newcastle's finance director who is currently helping fill the 
void created by Derek Llambias's sudden resignation as managing director on 
Wednesday, said: "Shearer's Bar was immensely popular when it was first 
launched in 2004 but its popularity has dwindled over the years as this part of 
Newcastle has developed and new bars have opened around it.

"In transforming the site and opening the bar up to a wider range of visitors, 
it was important that a new name remained in-keeping with the club's history 
and heritage and Nine is certainly faithful to that. We have liaised directly 
with Alan to keep him abreast of the plans, which he has been appreciative of, 
and we're looking forward to launching Nine next month."

As part of a special launch event, Newcastle are planning to raise funds for 
theAlan Shearer <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> Foundation, 
courtesy of a special charity auction of exclusive items to benefit the 
charity's work in supporting children, adults and families with disability 
across the north-east. It is unlikely that Kinnear will be attending after 
Shearer used his column in the Sun to lament his installation, something 
Kinnear announced in the media two days before Newcastle officially confirmed 
it.

"Right now people are laughing at the club I support and that sickens me," 
wrote Shearer. "I promised myself years ago to never be surprised by anything 
which happens in football, particularly when it came to Newcastle. But this 
situation really is stretching it a bit."

Shearer, who back in 2009 briefly took charge of Newcastle after Kinnear's 
first stint on Tyneside ended with the former manager being rushed to hospital 
with heart problems, feels considerable sympathy for Alan Pardew. "Newcastle 
have a manager who has just been totally undermined," he said. "I'm sure it 
will be a difficult situation. It's no way to treat a man who 12 months ago was 
manager of the year after guiding Newcastle to fifth place. He is in such an 
intolerable position.

"What are the players to think when Joe Kinnear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-kinnear> can't even get their names 
right. It's all a PR disaster. Mike Ashley just keeps on making too many 
decisions which alienate the Newcastle fans. They deserve better, much better."
 