
It involves a dashing Polish army lieutenant exiled in the US deep south as 
civil war approaches and the question of who he really loves: the plantation 
owner's angry niece, Miss Regina, or the tall, blond, rugged officer who 
arrives suddenly – a handsome man called Eric MacClure.

The television play is heady, emotional stuff tackling issues of race as well 
as sexuality and that it was broadcast by ITV on a winter's night 54 years ago 
is nothing short of remarkable. TheBFI <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi> 
now believes the newly rediscovered production is the earliest known gay TV 
drama.

South, adapted by Gerald Savory from an original play by Julien Green 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julien_Green> and screened on 24 November 1959, 
"is a milestone" in gay cultural history, said the BFI curator Simon McCallum.

He added that its leading man, Peter Wyngarde, deserved particular praise. "I 
think you have to give Wyngarde a massive pat on the back in terms of the 
bravery in taking this role. There were quite bad reactions from some of the 
press."

They included this breezily offensive review from the Daily Sketch's critic: 
"I do NOT see anything attractive in the agonies and ecstasies of a pervert, 
especially in close-up in my living room. This is not prudishness. There are 
some indecencies in life that are best left covered up."

To be fair, that was the prevailing attitude in Britain with homosexual acts 
between men still illegal, although the Wolfenden report in 1957 had 
recommended decriminalisation, something that would not happen until 1967.

Its discovery has taken curators aback because the 1961 film Victim, with Dirk 
Bogarde as a barrister taking on blackmailers, is normally held up as the 
milestone for gay representation on film and TV. South, made by Granada, is two 
years before it.

The film will be seen for the first time in a generation at the BFI's 27th 
London lesbian and gay film festival 
<http://edition.pagesuite-professional.co.uk/Launch.aspx?EID=b498a642-66b5-46d7-9624-ef236f4945e2>
 on Saturday and Sunday. "For many years it just wasn't known that this film 
existed other than to a few specialist researchers," said McCallum. "We're so 
glad to be able to show it at the festival because it's part of all our 
heritage, really."

South holds up well to a contemporary viewer, exploring universal themes of 
alienation and otherness. "The play is about north versus south, black versus 
white, straight versus gay," said McCallum.

There are some extremely moving scenes involving Wyngarde as Lieutenant Jan 
Wicziewsky, including one where he pours his heart out to the admittedly 
confused Jimmy, the young son of the plantation owner. "You know, Jimmy, odd 
times, freedom of will is a crushing weight and it's not always possible to 
choose. I'm in love Jimmy, as no human being was ever in love before," he says 
to the bewildered boy. "It's better not to know what men are thinking, it's 
almost always sad or shameful. I'm not ashamed, but I am alone. Hopelessly 
alone."

The object of his love is MacClure, a handsome army officer played by Graydon 
Gould who has just arrived at the plantation. "By today's standards it is all 
quite implicit, it is not explicit," said McCallum. "But it is pretty 
extraordinary – it all builds up in this pressure cooker atmosphere with war 
clouds looming in the background."

The discovery of South was made as part of the BFI's continuing research into 
the history of gay representation on screen. Researchers are not able to watch 
everything in the archive and are often alerted by listings in the Radio Times 
which will hint at something interesting, that there may be a subtext. In this 
case there was a hint that there was something not quite right about the main 
character and the fact that he was played by Wyngarde also set bells ringing 
because we now know he was in a long-term relationship with the actorAlan Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-bates>.

None of that was known at the time, with Wyngarde going on to be a star and 
housewives' favourite from 1969 as Jason King, an agent in the secretive 
Department S. With his handlebar moustache, enormous hair and largely 
unbuttoned shirt, King was the ultimate ladies' man and was one of the 
inspirations for Mike Myers's Austin Powers nearly 30 years later.

Although it was well-known in the acting world that Wyngarde was gay – he had 
the nickname Petunia Winegum – it was a closely guarded secret to the general 
public. "Watching it does remind you how brave he was at the time to take this 
role and the way the subject is dealt with is incredibly brave," said McCallum.

The discovery was "very exciting" and South becomes the earliest known British 
gay TV play. Whether it is the first is hard to say since so much of the 
television output from the 1950s and early 60s does not survive. Often live 
shows were not recorded or if they were, they were later wiped. "We are 
incredibly lucky that this one survives."

Given that South was live, it is remarkably slick with only a few stumbles 
over lines and only one panicked stagehand trying desperately to get out of 
shot.

After South there was very little gay representation on TV for most of the 
1960s with a few notable exceptions. ITV's This Week screened a documentary, 
Homosexuals, in 1964, followed by Lesbians in 1965. The most significant drama 
was a BBC Wednesday Play called Horror of Darkness, starring Nicol Williamson 
and Glenda Jackson, which was made in 1964 but not broadcast until 1965 because 
of concerns over its gay theme. It was left to British new wave movies to try 
to break boundaries with films such as Victim, The Servant and The L-Shaped 
Room.

After the festival screenings, South will become available to watch for 
nothing from next month atthe BFI's mediatheques 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/archive-collections/introduction-bfi-collections/bfi-mediatheques>
 in Glasgow, Newcastle, Wrexham, Cambridge, Derby and London.
 