
NFU Mutual promises 20% loyalty bonus

More than 850,000 NFU Mutual insurance customers will qualify for a loyalty 
bonus equivalent to between 12% and 20% off their premiums next year.

It will be the 11th year that the insurer has paid this bonus to its 
customers, with twice as many expected to benefit in 2010 than did this year. 
All customers renewing their general insurance policies - including motor, 
home, business and horse cover - will qualify.

The amount received depends on how long the policy has been in force. Anyone 
who is renewing for the first time will get a 12% discount, while someone 
renewing for the fifth time will get 20% off their premium.

Abbey and Alliance raise interest to 6%

Alliance & Leicester and Abbey are increasing the credit interest on their 
current accounts to 6% for customers applying from tomorrow. The rate, on 
Abbey's Preferred In-Credit Rate account and Alliance & Leicester's Premier 
Direct and Premier 50 accounts, applies to the first £2,500 and is fixed for a 
year, after which it will drop to 1%.

Although this is the highest rate on the market, some may be better off with 
Halifax's Reward Account, said Andrew Hagger of Moneynet.co.uk. "As long as you 
pay in £1,000 a month, you'll receive a monthly payment of £5 (£60 a year) 
irrespective of your balance."

HSBC's remortgage fix comes at a price

HSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> is relaunching its 
promise to match or beat homeowners' current mortgage rate, but the deal comes 
with fees of up to £4,700. The Rate Matcher mortgage is available to borrowers 
on deals with rates as low as 2.49% if they are prepared to fix their mortgage 
for two to five years and want a mortgage of £250,000 or less, worth up to 75% 
of the value of their home. The 2.49% rate will be available only as a two-year 
fix - the lowest rate for anyone wanting to fix for five years will be 4.24%. 
Someone with a £250,000 mortgage and equity of 25% will pay £4,699 to fix at 
2.49% for two years. From tomorrow, HSBC's website will provide a calculator to 
compare fees and rates.

One in three homes attacked by vermin

Wet and humid seasons, flooding, fewer bin collections ... all have been 
blamed for the increase in vermin and other nasties entering our homes in the 
past year. According to research fromConfused.com <http://www.confused.com>, 
just over a third of homeowners have suffered from pests in their homes, with 
bees and wasps topping the list, followed by pigeons, mice, squirrels and rats.

Some insurance policies do cover infestations though often only as an 
"add-on". "Check your policy, as the warm weather doesn't only bring the 
sun-loving Brits out of the woodwork," advises Confused.com's head of home 
insurance, Darren Black.
 