
The former News of the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>
 crime editor Lucy Panton wrote a story about the former police commander Ali 
Dizaei from the office of Scotland Yard's head press officer, it has emerged.

She wrote the story on a computer in the office of Scotland Yard's director of 
public affairs Dick Fedorcio, who was also given "advance sight" of her story, 
theLeveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> has been 
told.

The inquiry heard that Panton also used Fedorcio's email address to forward 
the story to the office.

In the email she said she couldnot delete the email and points out it "would 
not be helpful for people to know" she was using Fedorcio's computer.

In his written witness statement 
<http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Witness-Statement-of-Dick-Fedorcio.pdf>
 Fedorcio says he recalled how Panton had arrived at his offices "with a story 
about the reception into prison of ex-commander Ali Dizaei" and how he had 
refused to hand over his suit to prison officers.

He said he had set up "end-of-the-week meetings" with the tabloid paper in 
order to deal better with the News of the World which was in the habit of 
calling the Met on Saturday afternoons about their exclusives, giving them 
little time to react.

"At one of these end of the week meetings with Lucy Panton, in my office, at 
which I was seeking to gain an understanding of whether there were any issues 
or stories of which the MPS should be aware.

"I recall that she had arrived with a story about the reception into prison of 
ex-commanderAli Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> (in 
particular concerning his alleged refusal to hand over his suit to the prison 
staff).

"She was being chased by telephone and/or text by her office to file this 
story, which they were expecting from her. To help her, and as she was under 
pressure, I offered to let her type the story, which she did from notes that 
she arrived with, in an email on the standalone computer in my office. She 
accepted and wrote the story and sent it. I was present in the office 
throughout this time, and therefore got advance sight of a story about an MPS 
officer."

Fedorcio is currently on extended leave pending the results of the inquiry by 
the IndependentPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints 
Commission into the award of a PR contract to the former News of the World 
deputy editor Neil Wallis.

Earlier this month, the inquiry heard how the Met's commissioner Sir Paul 
Stephenson dined frequently with the paper's Wallis, often with Fedorcio in 
attendance. Stephenson told Leveson that some of these meetings had been logged 
in the gifts and hospitality register but they were "private" and did not 
involve expenses being claimed.

Fedorcio denied that he favoured News International or the News of the World 
in his dealings with the press and says he did not become friends with any 
journalist through "networking" over drinks or meals. "I have no personal 
contact with any of the journalists I have dealt with in my time with the 
police," he told Leveson.

The Leveson inquiry heard how in 2003, Fedorcio paid visits to seven different 
newspaper groups but the Sun and the News of the World were the only ones to be 
visited twice. He had three lunches with Panton that year and one with the then 
editor Andy Coulson.

The following year the News of the World was again the most visited paper 
alongside the Evening Standard and it was also the most visited newspaper in 
2004, 2005, and 2006 while in 2007, he had the same number of meetings with 
News of the World, the Sun, the Daily Express and the Evening Standard.

Fedorcio also denied there was an bias towards hiring ex-Murdoch journalists 
after it emerged that 12 staff in the press office used to work at News 
International titles. He said of those only three had worked for the News of 
the World. However, none were staff – one had worked on freelance shift between 
1988 and 1989; another had a four-month contract with the paper in 1985; and 
the third did some freelance shifts in 2004. He says no one who worked for the 
News of the World has been employed since 2004.

Fedorcio said of the remainder, four worked for Sky News; one for the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Paper; two for the Sun; and one had one 
week's work on the Times.

He added that he met tabloids more frequently than broadsheets because of the 
interest in salacious crime stories and their need for "detail" about 
operations.

• This story was corrected on 16 March 2012 to make clear in the 11th 
paragraph that it was Paul Stephenson, Metropolitan Police commissioner from 
2009-2011, who lunched with Neil Wallis, not - as originally stated in error - 
John Yates, assistant commissioner from 2006-2011. We are happy to make this 
clear.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 