
Scientists cannot be sure that next year’s flu vaccine will protect people 
against the strains that will be circulating in the coming winter, because the 
decision as to which ones to include has to be made within the next few weeks, 
at least eight months before next the flu vaccination campaign begins.

Dr John McCauley of the Medical Research Council, who is director of the World 
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation Collaborating 
Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza, said the long time lag makes it 
hard to get a vaccine that is an exact match and hence an inoculation against 
the strains of the disease that will be circulated the following winter.

The time lag is needed to grow the chosen virus strains in eggs and then 
manufacture large quantities of the vaccine. This year there was a mismatch and 
as a result it was estimated by Public Health England that the vaccine is 
protecting only 3.4% of those given it.

The vaccine contains three varieties of flu virus: H1N1, H3N2 and influenza B. 
The mismatch this winter has been in H3N2. Because of “drift” – gradual change 
or mutation – in the circulating strain of H3N2 flu, the vaccine is only 3% 
protective against it, Public Health England said on Thursday.

Next year’s choice of vaccine, a decision that is imminent, is not 
straightforward, McCauley added. There are two new groups of H3N2 virus 
circulating in the world now, not one. “We know we are going to move. The 
question is which of the two we go to,” he said.

“We have to assess the question of whether these two groups are antigenically 
very different from each other and what would make the best vaccine. That has 
to be decided by 26 February.”

This time last year, McCauley and colleagues at centres abroad were mulling 
over what to include in this winter’s flu vaccine. “We didn’t even know at the 
time we were recommending that this virus had started to appear out there.

“By the time we could have been in any position at all to give them something 
to grow it would probably have been June or July and it had all happened,” he 
said. “They [the manufacturers] are packing by that stage.”

The first he knew of a new variant of H3N2 was in March, when he was contacted 
by his counterpart in the US, asking if the UK surveillance had detected the 
virus. The answer was no. He wrote to the other WHO collaborating centre 
directors in other countries, some of whom had seen the odd report.

The first evidence that the vaccine was not protecting older people against 
H3N2 also came from the US, where the flu season began in early December, well 
ahead of that in the UK, which began around Christmas. It was not a complete 
surprise. “We were not expecting it to work as well as it had done,” McCauley 
said.

Two to three weeks ago, the evidence from the US was becoming clear, where the 
numbers of vaccinated people and people falling ill with flu were bigger. 
Public Health England then carried out the study published this week which 
confirmed that the situation was the same in the UK.

“The research, based on the results from 1,314 patients presenting in primary 
care across the UK, found that vaccine effectiveness in preventing laboratory 
confirmed influenza was estimated to be 3% overall. This compares to 
approximately 50% vaccine effectiveness that has typically been seen in the UK 
over recent years,” said PHE in its statement.

This is not the first time. Given the guesswork and the time lag involved in 
the choice of viruses, it is surprising it is not more common, according to 
Sylvie van der Werf from the Institut Pasteur in France and a colleague, 
writing in the journal Eurosurveillance, which published the data on the 
current vaccine’s limitations. “In spite of the challenges to define the 
vaccine composition, when excepting the 2009 pandemic, mismatches for viruses 
circulating in Europe occurred only once for A(H1N1) viruses and three times 
for A(H3N2) viruses in the past 12 years,” they said.

Flu <https://www.theguardian.com/society/flu> vaccination is still worthwhile, 
said public health experts, urging people not to forgo the jab. It protects 
against other varieties of flu virus and may still offer some protection 
against H3N3.

Dr Michael Skinner, head of the Vaccine Vector Group at Imperial College 
London, compared the difficulty of predicting which virus would be likely to 
cause most illness to a Jack Bauer car chase in Los Angeles.

“At any intersection, the fugitive has three choices of direction. Bauer can’t 
catch up, and he doesn’t know the ultimate destination, so he has to try to 
guess the likeliest turns and place his limited team in side streets where 
they’re most likely to block the fugitive, to slow him down or capture him. 
Even with Jack Bauer’s experience, this is bound to prove somewhat 
hit-and-miss,” he said. “What Jack really needs is to be able to deploy the 
national guard to block every side street and drive the fugitive towards the 
roadblock awaiting him.”

But flu vaccine efforts were worthwhile, he added: “Even from the perspective 
of someone like myself who has some interest in helping develop newer and 
better types of influenza vaccine, the current type of seasonal influenza 
vaccine is, at the moment, the best we have. Annually it saves tens of 
thousands of lives.”
 