
The concept for my book The Nolympics  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/sportandleisure/9780718197612/the-nolympics-one-mans-struggle-against-sporting-hysteria>
was, from the publisher's point of view, a risky one – but it was theirs. It 
was to have me write up, daily, my experience, as a Londoner, of what it was 
like to follow the Olympics; moreover, as someone who was not looking forward 
to them one little bit. The idea, I suppose, was to have the comedy of 
frustration: in the old, Perelmanian sense of comedy being about getting a man 
up a tree, throwing rocks at him, and then, finally, getting him down from the 
tree. I was to be that man, and the Olympics were to be those rocks, and my 
cries of pain were to be the main substance of the book. "What if you end up 
enjoying them?" I was asked. "Not terribly likely," I replied. "If I do, then 
that will be part of the story." But the chief riskiness resided, as far as I 
could see, in the fact that it was me they had asked to do this. I am not known 
particularly for my industry; and, after all, I have yet to have a book 
published at all. And I was going to have to work quite hard indeed.

Writing a minimum of 1,500 publishable words a day, ideally 2,000, over a 
17-day period is not a task that many writers would look to with enthusiasm. 
Then again, there are quite a few who would regard it as nothing special. On 
the one hand, you have Trollope knocking off 3,000 words a morning before 
setting off to work running the Post Office, and Gustave Flaubert writhing on 
the carpet in agony for hours as to where to place a comma. There is a certain 
amount of braggadocio involved when writers talk about this – especially male 
writers. There is no shame in saying you write slowly. The miracle, it is 
tacitly understood, is that any of it gets done at all; the speed you do it at 
isn't really that important, although if you say you write too many words a 
day, people start wondering if the quality control is strict enough, and if you 
say you write hardly anything, then people might ask themselves if you're being 
a bit precious, or how you can afford to feed yourself. For myself, about 1,500 
words on the same subject is a day of Stakhanovite labour, to be rewarded by a 
big, self-administered pat on the back.

However, I know that, when pressed, and in the mood, and (I use the word in 
its loosest sense) inspired, I can write at great speed; it's one of the things 
that makes life as a hack a bit less difficult than it otherwise has to be. It 
is also a phenomenon along the lines of how it is sometimes better to run up 
three flights of stairs rather than walk up them: the body simply doesn't 
register that it's knackered, the lungs don't start telling you to slow down, 
until you're nearly at the end. It can be the slow, steady slog that kills and 
dispirits. And anyway, spread out over a working day, it's not that much: just 
as when you complain to the doctor that a bottle of wine a night is hardly 
anything if you're drinking only a glass an hour between six in the evening and 
midnight.

Still, it is alarming, like performing without a safety net, when you realise 
there is no time daily for anything but the most basic revision. The matter of 
tone, and its modulation or progress throughout the book, has to be settled on 
the hoof; a kind of honesty is forced upon the material, so if it seems as 
though the book starts flippantly but ends more thoughtfully, then that's 
because that's the way things were going on in my head.

By "thoughtful", again I mean tone. I do not mean in the careful avoidance of 
mistakes. Here are a couple towards the end which I will own up to, in order to 
spare the reviewers a bit of effort: for example, Humphrey Jennings's film was 
calledLondon Can Take It <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gno3mIrh7PM>, not 
Britain Can Take It; and whatever gremlin inspired me to give The Who's late 
bassist the first name "Robert" when I know perfectly well, and have done since 
I was 11, that it is "John", maybe one day the therapists will be able to nail 
it down and lay it to rest.

As for the Olympics themselves: although I did not go quite as hoopla about 
them as everyone else seemed to – or was induced to by peer pressure – I 
certainly found myself enjoying the whole spectacle much more than I thought I 
would. The athletes were gracious in victory, the volunteers wonderful. To 
clear the air of the toxins that had been building up before was quite 
something. I also discovered that I am really, really impressed by synchronised 
swimming.

In the end, though, I managed to produce 40,000 words over 17 days – all the 
while not neglecting my other jobs – which is, I suppose, something. (Also a 
couple of those days were spent travelling to and from Olympic venues and 
watching things.) There were times when the prospect of working sickened me: 
but I knew that any shortfall one day would mean it would have to be made up 
the next. Luckily, the whole phenomenon of the Olympics, and the country's 
reactions to it, was so interesting that there was never a shortage of 
material, and I like to think there isn't too much repetition within the book 
itself.

Themes, though, crop up: a recurring one, I discovered, is my fascinated 
loathing for Boris Johnson, a much more dangerous man than even his enemies 
seem to acknowledge, and if this book helps in any small way to put a brake on 
his political career, then I will at least be able to say I have achieved 
something.

• The Nolympics: One Man's Struggle Against Sporting Hysteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/sportandleisure/9780718197612/the-nolympics-one-mans-struggle-against-sporting-hysteria>
 is published by Penguin.
 