
Preamble 
 Ghana may be Germany-bound but the bookies make Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> favourites in this 
clash of the West African giants. And that makes sense: the Super Eagles may be 
shorn of Jay-Jay Okocha but injuries have hit the Ghanaians even harder - star 
midfielders Michael Essien and Sulley Muntari are huge absences, and the Black 
Stars could have done with a fit Asamoah Gyan, too.

All of which means the prolific Obafemi Martins and Shakhtar Donetsk speedster 
Julius Aghahowa should have plentiful opportunities to stretch the Ghanaian 
defence; at least that's the thinking that led me to plonk £5 on Martins to 
score first - and another wager says he'll be the tournament's top scorer. Yes, 
I did place that before the hat-tricks from Samuel Eto'o and Sylvinho Dos 
Santos ...

Teams: Nigeria: 1-Vincent Enyeama; 2-Joseph Yobo (c), 3-Taye Taiwo, 5-Chidi 
Odiah, 6-Joseph Enakarhire; 13-Ayila Yussuf, 16-Wilson Oruma, 18-Chris Obodo, 
20-Peter Odemwingie; 9-Obafemi Martins, 17-Julius Aghahowa

Ghana: 1-Sam Adjei; 4-Samuel Kuffour, 6-Emmanuel Pappoe, 15-John Pantsil, 
18-Abubakari Yakubu, 21-Gabriel Issah Ahmed; 5-John Mensah, 7-Laryea Kingston, 
10-Stephen Appiah (c), 23-Haminu Draman; 14-Matthew Amoah

3:43pm: National anthems duly crooned, both sides shakes hands with each other 
as per the formalities, form themselves into a photogenic pattern for the 
assembled snappers, and finally take up their positions on either side of the 
half-way line. Let the battle commence!

1 min: Nigeria set the game in motion, and immediately launch the ball forward 
in search of Martins. But Taiwo's punt is too long and it's a kick-out to Ghana.

3 mins: After some zipply interplay from Nigeria, Ghana regain possession and 
Appiah tries to slip Amoah through. But his pass was like Tottenham's Andy Reid 
- it had far too much weight on it.

6 mins: Obodo concedes a corner, which Appiah overhits awfully. 

Here's Shane Breslin, scoffing at my wager on Martins, and then exposing 
himself as someone even more misguided: "I thought Sammy Eto'o was an 
unbelievable, stand-out price at 6/1 to be top scorer ... which makes my 20 
quid bet on Ivory Coast to win the whole thing at 13/2 all the more mystifying."

8 mins: After a neat build-up from Ghana, Pantsil clipped a dainty ball from 
the right wing towards Draman on the edge of the penalty area; Enakarhire cuts 
it out ... possibly with his hand, but the Egyptian referee waves play on.

Meanwhile, here's some mordant rhetoric from Joanne Lenton, who's probably not 
a Chelsea fan: "Did Nigeria bother wearing their shin pads and ankle protectors 
now Essien isn't playing?" she quips.

12 mins: The loss of Okocha has highlighted a severe lack of creativity in 
Nigeria's midfield; they're just pumping the ball long towards Martins as if 
the little Inter man were the African Peter Crouch. Surely we'll see the 
much-vaunted teenager John Obi Mikel, who's hailed by every Nigerian I know as 
the next Maradona, at some point in the game?

15 mins: Appiah glides another corner in, this time to the front post, where 
Gabriel Issah meets it with his forehead. but direct its into the advertising 
hoarding for some reason.

17 mins: Obodo chops down Amoah, giving Ghana a free-kick about 35 yards out. 
The goalkeeper says he only needs two men in the wall - but, in fact, he didn't 
need any, as Appiah's pot-shot was, now that we've all gone metric, several 
kilometers wide.

21 mins: The enterprising Pantsil raids down the right again, and is then 
crowded out. Nigeria pinch position but again just balloon it forward in search 
of Martins, who's beaten to it by Pappoe.

22 mins: Obodo flicks the ball past Kuffour and is then hacked to the ground: 
free-kick to Nigeria. "They have five men in the wall plus another African" 
says Eurosport analyst Brian Hamiliton, bafflingly. Taiwo's shot is nothing to 
write on the Internet about.

24 mins: Issah curtails a swift Nigerian counter-attack by body-slamming Oruma 
to the ground. Free-kick from 40 yards ... and this time Taiwo gets it right: 
what a thunderbolt! Tremendous save by Sam Adjei, who manages to push it around 
the post for a corner.

25 mins: Adjei spills the corner inexcusably and it's scrambled out for 
another one ... which he spills again! Bizarre goalkeeping from the man who 
moments earlier produced a stunning save. His defence bail him out this time.

26 mins: Ghana race up the other end, and Amoah shaves the woodwork with a 
zinger from outside the box. Keeper well beaten.

31 mins: Both sides are winning plenty of free-kicks, which, of course, also 
means both sides are giving away plenty of free-kicks. And you'd be tempted to 
say a set-piece looks the most likely source of a goal, except for the fact 
that 90% of the deliveries so far have been of the sort that would get most 
postmen sacked.

32 mins: Appriah eanrs a corner for Ghana, and then takes it. John Mensah 
soars to meet it, and nuts it narrowly wide.

33 mins: Ayila Yussuf comes up for a corner, heads it feebly in the general 
direction of the goal ... and keeper Adjei dives acrobatically to complete a 
spectacular and wholly unnecessary save!

35 mins: Ghana starting to attack in numbers now; after Layrea went close with 
a decent shot, Amoah poked the ball through for Appiah to chase. He went around 
the out-rushing keeper but his shot was cleared off the line.

36 mins: Sneaky long-range daisy-cutter from the hitherto invisible Peter 
Odemwingie - tipped wide by Adjei.

40 mins: Aghahowa receives the ball on the edge of the Ghanaian box, he twists 
and turns and waits for support. But none comes, so he side-steps Mensah and 
then unleashes a fine shot - just wide!

Injecting some much-needed wisdom into this commentary, Dela Vlve points out 
that, "a team of pigs led by a lion is more formidable than a team of lions led 
by a pig." Is that a comment on Messrs Appiah and Yobo, Dela?

41 mins: Wafted cross from Odemwingie, Martins mis-controls but it flops to 
Aghahowa, whose half-volley flies inches over. 76 inches, that is.

Meanwhile, pun-crazy Fergal Cunningham observes: "You'd think John Mensah 
would be good with his head."

42 mins: Oruma out-muscles Appiah in the middle of the park then strides 
forward and lets fly with a 25-yard blockbuster - Adjei makes another 
spectacular save, and this time it was needed.

45 mins: Appiah scorches down the left, then turns inside Odiah and hammers a 
shot towards the top corner. But it beaten away by Vincent Enyeama, who's 
determined not to be outdone in the spectacular stakes by Adjei.

Half-time 

 Colin McCracken has been dredging through his memory and found this gem: "The 
funniest interview I ever saw a footballer give was Rio Ferdinand during the 
2002 World Cup. Talking about the threat posed by Nigeria, he said: 'They have 
loads of good players .... Kanu ... and, um, the boy who does all the flips and 
that.' The interviewer had started the next question, when Rio interrupted, 
shouting 'Agahowa', and sat back really proud of himself for remembering the 
players name." Fascinatingly, maybe, the then-Nigeria manager Festus Ongibende 
told me before the 2002 World Cup that Agahowa came from a family of travelling 
gymnasts - circus folk, if you will; I never have been able to establish 
whether this is true or if he was taking the pi... mickey out of me. Anyone?

Reacting to my assertion that "every Nigerian I know says John Obi Mikel is 
the next Maradona," Colin also demands to know: "jsut how many Nigerians do you 
know." The answer, Colin, is dozens, all of whom may or may not be related to 
young Mikel. And at this point I should point out that Darren Caskey was once 
lauded as the next big thing in English football ...

Nick Read asks: "I am currently conducting a count of how many times defending 
in the African Cup of Nations is referred to as naïve; I am currently up to 
five. Has anyone else noticed this phenomenon?" Of course we've noticed it, 
Nick, and you'll not find any such nonsense here. It's always amazes me that 
sloppy defending by, say, Rio Ferdinand is, well, sloppy; but by an African 
it's naive. And, of coruse, wayward lunges by, say, Steven Gerrard are 
'over-exuberant', late tackles by African players are down to an inherent lack 
of discipline.

And Ian Shine has a query, too: "Remembering back to 2004, Efan Ekoku, 
obviously the world's greatest pundit, couldn't shut up about how great Agahowa 
was. Is he (Agahowa, not Ekoku) still rubbish?" Well, he's never been rubbish, 
Ian, but neither has he ever truly fulfileld the potential he showed in the 
2000 ACN. Ekoku, by contrast, is still a rubbish pundit, I hear.

46 mins: We're back, and Odiah immediately stings Adjei's hand with a 
long-ranger.

48 mins: Nigeria have started the second half in roistering form; Odemwingie 
went close from 20 yards, and then the entire Ghananain defence had to descsned 
on Martins in the box to prevent him shooting.

50 mins: Oruma sends one forward for Martins to scamper after ... which he 
does ... and so does the Ghanaian keeper! The striker gets to it first, dances 
past Adjei, and then rolls the ball towards the empty goal from a very acute 
angle ... and finds only the side-netting. A real reprieve for the Ghanaiains, 
who have been besieged since the resumption.

51 mins: Ghana try to relieve the pressure and pile forward with purpose: cue 
chaos in the Nigerian box, and the ball breaks to Abubakari Yakuba, who 
unleashes a rocket - brave block by Taiwo!

53 mins: Excellent play by Taiwo, who nutmegs Pantsil at the by-line and 
stomrs into the box. He pulls it back to the penalty spot to the waiting Oruma. 
But the Marseille man volleys into the ground and wide. A shameful waste.

55 mins: The Nigerians are utterly dominant: give them white coats and a set 
of microscopes and they still couldn't see any more of the ball. But so far the 
Ghanaian defence, marshalled superbly by the returned-from-exile- Sammy Kuffour 
are holding strong. The tempo and tension have discernibly increased, though.

56 mins: Martins and Obody perform a sumptuous, back-heeled one-two, the move 
culminating, oxymoronically, in anti-climax: Obodo shot straight at Adjei.

62 mins: Joseph Yobo concedes a free-kick in his own half - the first time 
Ghana have made it that far in at least five minutes. Kingston drifts a teasing 
free-kick in, but everyone misses it.

66 mins: Martings chases down a long hoof forward, and for his troubles is 
clattered by Kuffour. Free to Nigeria, wide on the right. Taiwo curls it in 
wickedly, but Mensah tonks it clear.

 67 mins: Yobo dawdles at the back and is robbed by Appiah, who bounds into 
the box and feeds Draman at the near post. Good save by Enyeama. The corner is 
cleared, but Appiah knocks it back in to Amoah, who's completely unmarked 12 
yards from goal! His volley is turned away brilliantly by one hand by Enyeama!

69 mins: More shoddy Nigerian defending yields another superb chance for 
Ghana. Kingston clipped a corss to the back post, where unmarked Draman dived 
to head wide from 5 yards!

73 mins: Yakubu gives away a free-kick at the corner of the box, though his 
brushing against Oruma hardly constituted a foul. Odemwingie rolls it cleverly 
to Martins' feet. He flicks it in the direction of Aghahowa, but Kuffour 
intercepts to hoof it clear.

74 mins: Ghana substitution: Yakubu off, Hans Sarpei on. 

76 mins: Corner to Nigeria - but it won't be taken for a while, as no fewer 
than three Ghanaian defender have gone down injured. Seems Nigerian domination 
has trigged a mass outbreak of cramp. Or, gee, could they be time-wasting?

79 mins: Nigeria subsitution: Agahowa, who's done next to nothing, is replaced 
by WBA amusement arcade Kanu, to borrow a piece of Ron Atkinson's vocabularly. 
Not the sort of guy you'd want to be borrowing too many expressions from though.

80 mins: With Kuffour off receiving treatment, Issah is booked for barging 
into Kanu. Yobo dives to head the free-kick off the feet of Obodo. Corner to 
Nigeria.81 mins: Kuffour is back on, and Ghana lift the siege long enough to 
win a free-kick a couple of yards inside the Nigerian half. It comes to 
nothing, so Nigeria can churn forward anew.

Nigeria substitution: Victor Nsofor on for Odemwingie

84 mins: Goal! Nigeria 1-0 Ghana Oruma is bundled over 40 yards out. Thinking 
quickly, Yussuf rolls it sideways to Taiwo, who hammers a wonderful shot past a 
bemused keeper! Having defends like bouncers for most of the match, the 
Ghanaiains momentarily lost their concentration, allowing Taiwo to sneak a 
superb goal!

86 mins: Desperate for a goal, Ghana have thrown on JoeTex Frimpong, former 
top scorer in the African Champions League for Enyimba ... of Nigeria.

90 mins: The referee indicate six minutes added time!

90 mins: Unless Ghana invent a way to score without the ball, they're not 
going to equalise. Nigeria are hogging possession with poise and skill.

93 minutes: A series of fair but wonderfully brutal challenges in the middle 
of the pitch. Eventually the ref decides to award a free-kick to Ghana for no 
obvious reasons. It's lofted straight towards the goalkeeper, who fumbles it 
out for a corner. Could that prove costly? No, becuase Enyeama compensates by 
claiming Appiah's corner with style

96 mins: The final whistle sounds, signalling the start of jubilant dancing 
from the Nigerians. "To be honest," says Eurosport analyst Brian Hamilton, "I 
think Nigeria will be happy with the three points." To be honest, Brian, I 
think that's a quite awesome insight. Thank you. And thak you too, readers, for 
following this. Tune in throughout the week for more from the African Cup of 
Nations.
 