
Confidant Martins is not quite living up to her name. Sporting a purple velvet 
dress with a white lace collar, she avoids eye contact and is largely silent. 
She huddles in her tiny sitting room in Lagos, as though trying to shut out 
Nigeria's frantic megacity of 15 million people.

A photograph of her bespectacled father, Danjuma, hangs on the wall above her. 
He was present when the Guardian met the newborn Confidant in 2005. Danjuma has 
since died. He was HIV positive. Confidant's mother, Deborah, and two of her 
three siblings also have HIV.

Just over 3% of Nigerians are HIV-positive, according to the most recent UN 
statistics from 2007. Nigerian government data put prevalence among pregnant 
women at 4.6% the following year, suggesting the rate might have since 
increased.

The loss of the bread-winner has hit a family that was already struggling to 
make ends meet. Danjuma was a waiter in a high-end Lagos hotel, frequented by 
the oil tycoons and bankers who live on the other side of the country's vast 
income gap. He earned 25,000 naira (approximately £100) a month. His employer 
also paid many of his medical bills until he died in late 2008.

"The man of the family is important to us in Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>," laments his wife, a petite and 
pretty woman in a geometric-print African dress. "He is supposed to pay for 
school fees, buy clothes, and look after us." She knows little about the 
infection that finally killed her husband, other than that it "seemed to make 
him lose his senses".

She works as a cleaner at her church. She earns N7,000 a month. Nigeria's 
minimum wage is N17,000, but such rules mean little in a country with a mostly 
cash-in-hand informal economy.

Most of her salary goes on a monthly rent bill of N5,000. The family rents two 
rooms in a poor but relatively safe area of Lagos. In one room, Deborah and her 
four children sleep in one double bed. In the other, they have weathered 
armchairs and some signs of modern life – a television, a small stereo and a 
fridge.

Sadly, Nigeria's woeful electricity supply means that the family get little 
use out of those gadgets. Their compound sometimes goes for a fortnight without 
any power. Many Nigerians ask why their rich politicians have not addressed 
this great irony: that one of Africa's biggest oil producers and wealthiest 
countries still does not generate enough electricity to turn its lights on. 
Nigerians mutter angrily about corruption at the top.

Deborah wants to leave Lagos and return to Kaduna, her home state in Nigeria's 
mainly Muslim north. Food and rent would be far cheaper there than in the 
country's business capital. But she would not be able to get antiretroviral 
drugs back in her village.

The megacity Lagos also has some benefits. Babatunde Fashola, Lagos' 
progressive governor, is doing much to improve things. Deborah used to spend 
N3,000 a month on the family's antiretrovirals. She now gets them for free. 
There are plans to install proper plumbing on her street, so that each of the 
11 families in her compound will have their own tap. They all currently share 
one borehole and one so-called "pit toilet". They pay N10 for five litres of 
drinking water at the market.

Confidant and her eight-year-old sister, Faith, attend a primary school there 
that charges N5,000 a term. Ten-year-old Abigail attends another school that 
has temporarily waived her fees out of sympathy. Emmanuel, the oldest child and 
the only boy, will start secondary school in September.

"Abigail wants to be a doctor. Faith wants to be an accountant," Deborah says 
with a large smile. She says all her children will go to university, even 
though she fears she will soon run out of money for their school fees.

Nigeria has free public schools, but few parents have faith in their quality. 
Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the managing director of the World Bank and a former 
Nigerian finance minister, has urged the country to spend more of its vast 
wealth on education. "These are schools where the children do not have desks 
and the teachers do not have chalks in some cases," she said during a speech in 
Lagos this year.

Confidant is lucky to have survived her first five years without catching 
malaria, which kills thousands of infants and toddlers in Nigeria each year. 
Typhoid is another big killer. Yet she does not seem pleased about any of her 
victories. Her ambitious sisters leap about their cramped home and pose for the 
camera. She stares into the lens but refuses to smile.

Factfile: Nigeria

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 186

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 83.91%

Debt per capita: $65.22 (£41.74)

Life expectancy: 49

% children in education (F/M): 67.5/83.2 (2004)
 