
Dredd, which arrives in UK cinemas later this week, has had a chequered path 
to production: director Pete Travis wasreportedly locked out of the editing 
suite at one stage while screenwriter Alex Garland finished the film 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/movies/2011/10/director-drama-heats-up-on-dredd.html>
. The pair later issued a statement in which they denied Travis had been ousted 
and put to rest rumours that Garland might seek a co-director's credit. 
Nevertheless, the whole affair hardly invited optimism.

Whoever's stamp is on the final cut – and Travis was missing from the special 
screening I attended last week in London, while Garland held centre-stage – 
there are no signs that the film has suffered from the lack of a unified 
vision. In fact there is nothing muddled or vague about the second adaptation 
of the2000 AD <http://www.2000adonline.com/> comic strip Judge Dredd to hit 
cinemas (after1995's misfiring Sylvester Stallone vehicle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/60739/judge-dredd>). It is the very 
definition of a lean, direct, no-holds-barred action movie – albeit a stylish 
and atmospheric one – so much so that some might even leave the cinema 
wondering if the creative team could have spent a little more time getting 
under the skin of their hero.

As 2000 AD aficionados will know, that would have been an error. Dredd, which 
takes place in a sprawling future megalopolis of 800 million people policed by 
all-powerful Judges, is refreshingly free of the angsty navel-gazing that 
usually accompanies big-screen comic book instalments, and that's just as it 
should be. Mega-City One's best known lawman (here played by a Clint 
Eastwood-channelling Karl Urban) never was your traditional Marvel/DC-style 
superhero, with a love interest, a private life and a secret list of hangups. 
If anyone ever did manage to lift that famous helmet and peer through the 
windows to his soul, they'd be highly unlikely to discover even the merest 
flicker of doubt or uncertainty. Dredd-style justice means making a 
split-second decision and sticking to it, even if that means consigning a 
"perp" to serve the rest of his or her life in a solitary jail cell known as an 
"isocube". You never look back.

Following that breezy but brutal mantra to the letter, Garland and Travis have 
given us a tight, 95-minute movie that leaves no time at all for the narrative 
to get swamped in expansive ideas or emotional intrigue. At one point, after we 
have witnessed epic scenes of giant buildings being blown apart, criminals 
splattering on the pavement after 80-storey drops and spectacular gun battles 
between the law and the bad guys, someone asks Dredd what he's been up to that 
day. "Drug bust", comes the functional, typically understated reply. The film 
feels like the extended pilot episode of a really, really good TV series, and 
that's absolutely fine: it leaves plenty room for the second and third 
instalments to grow in scope and stature should the first movie prove a success.

Where Dredd exceeds expectations is in its realisation. The drug bust in 
question centres on a gargantuan tower block ruled by villain Ma-Ma (Lena 
Headey), who rules with an iron fist while hooking up the inhabitants with 
(apparently) high-quality supplies of the intoxicant slo-mo. Smoking this stuff 
causes the user to experience a time-stretched haze in which a second feels 
like an hour, and so on and so forth. This dreamy, opaque existence is extended 
to and borrowed for the film's atmospheric sequences, which are peppered with 
wonderfully washed out musical interludes from Scottish composer Paul 
Leonard-Morgan. At key moments the very fabric of the universe seems to split 
and bulge at a molecular level, vividly shifting and refracting before the 
viewer's eyes. It's brilliantly ambitious stuff that adds a real touch of 
otherworldly class.

Urban's Judge Dredd doesn't just borrow his gruff brogue from Eastwood: 
there's a measured minimalism and brooding scorn of unnecessary fuss there too 
which recalls the latter's best work. Olivia Thirlby is also strong as the 
psychic rookie Anderson, based on the comic's Psi-Judge Anderson, though again 
there's not a lot going on under the hood. In fact there are no real 
grandstanding performances in Dredd, no scenery chewing and little bombastic 
chest-thumping. It is a long way from the over-the-top, Paul Verhoevenesque 
sci-fi satire one might have expected, but what it lacks in larger-than-life 
villains – a staple of the comics – and futuristic silliness (there are no 
fatties or mutants to be seen) it makes up for with elegant cinematography and 
cerebellum-twisting special effects.

"So far, the response from Dredd fans that have seen the film has been very 
positive," Garland told me afterwards. "But actually, they were supportive of 
the film from day one. I read the 2000 AD message board throughout the 
production, and always felt they were on our side."

Early reviews suggest that the critics are also supportive. The film, a 
British production from DNA Films, currently has a 100% "fresh" rating on the 
review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes, though from a small 12-review sample. 
Fingers crossed that fans of hard-hitting science fiction will come out to see 
it, because a world in which more movies like Dredd hit our multiplexes would 
be a future I think we'd all like to live in.

• This article was amended on 4 September. The original stated that Dredd was 
released next month. In fact it is released this Friday, the 7 September
 