
Opposition to animal experimentation is based on compassion and scientific 
evidence. It has nothing to do with provoking fear among animal researchers (We 
can experiment on monkeys without harming them. Scientists should not be 
frightened away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/25/guardian-view-on-vital-medical-research-on-primates>
, Editorial, 26 May). Brain research on monkeys typically involves appalling 
suffering, including invasive surgery so that restraining and recording devices 
can be implanted in their heads (these implants can easily become infected). 
Monkeys used in research will often be left hungry or thirsty, so that they 
will be sufficiently motivated to perform tasks for a small food or fluid 
“reward”. Yet a recent government-commissioned report into brain research on 
monkeys commented that in most cases “little direct evidence was available of 
actual medical benefit in the form of changes in clinical practice or new 
treatments.” Like other forms of vivisection, experiments on monkeys should be 
replaced with non-animal methods that provide results directly relevant to 
humans.
Isobel Hutchinson
Campaigner, Animal Aid <http://www.animalaid.org.uk/h/n/AA/HOME/>

• Your editorial on monkey experiments was unbalanced and inaccurate. Monkey 
experiments are not – and cannot be – “humane”. While the BUAV deplores 
personal threats by any individuals, rejection of intimidation shouldn’t 
justify an “open season” that permits any suffering for human knowledge. Most 
people, including most scientists, will draw a line somewhere, and this type of 
primate research surely crosses the line.

The BUAV investigated the laboratory mentioned and uncovered disturbing 
evidence of how those monkeys suffered severely. Neither is acknowledged by the 
Guardian. Monkeys were forcibly dragged from their cages, had parts of their 
skulls removed and electrodes implanted into their brains, were restrained and 
immobilised by their heads for hours, and deprived of water for days.

This has no place in civilised society, but is also to no avail: the value of 
these, and other, monkey experiments to human medicine is speculative and 
exaggerated; there are important differences between primates and humans in 
brain structure and function; the significance of results of ethical research 
on humans is grossly underestimated, while ethically conducted studies in 
humans are more than feasible – they already take place widely. Compassion for 
animals in laboratories is not “sentimentality”; it goes hand-in-hand with 
compassion for humans, both of which would be served by leaving cruel and 
demonstrably unnecessary monkey experiments behind in favour of truly humane 
and human-relevant science.
Jarrod Bailey
Senior research scientist, BUAV <http://www.buav.org/>

• I support “pushback” against primate research not out of “sentimentality and 
fear” but because life as a whole is more important than the purely human part 
of it – without all the rest we wouldn’t even be here; because we’re animals 
(and primates) ourselves – otherwise animal models couldn’t deliver knowledge; 
because anthropocentrism is just as biologically illiterate as 
anthropomorphism; and because whether ends justify means should always be open 
to challenge. Perhaps research on monkeys can be conducted without harming 
them, but you can’t do pain research (for instance) without inflicting pain. So 
there will always be dispute about “compassionate” priorities.
David William Evans
Leeds

• I was very disappointed in your editorial. It purports to be objective and 
rational yet it builds in so many assumptions that it leads inevitably to the 
conclusion that animal experiments are necessary. To quote just one: “So here 
is a specific and valuable advance in knowledge that could only have been 
attained by experimentation on animals that closely resemble us; experiments 
which are, as far as we can tell, almost painless.” Why could these almost 
painless experiments not have been carried out on humans? If there is a good 
reason, then why does it not also preclude carrying out that experiment on 
animals that closely resemble us? Close enough to be useful to us but not close 
enough to worry about their pain? As far as I can tell that’s unjustifiable.
Robin Gardner
West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire

• Your editorial concludes with a chilling phrase: “... that urge to 
understand which seems uniquely human should triumph over sentimentality and 
fear”. Does such a triumph of the will to understand reduce compassion for the 
welfare of those who are less than human to mere sentimentality?

It’s precisely that kind of assertion that has led to the violation of the 
bodies of many people considered less than human (for example people with 
learning disabilities) and in civilised countries many decades after Mengele.

The crucial ethical point as made by the philosopher Peter Singer is: it’s not 
whether they’re intelligent, or whether they’re human, it’s whether they can 
suffer. I like to think we value another quality that is uniquely human: our 
capacity for ethics.
Mike Kaye
West Slaithwaite, West Yorkshire
 