
When Australia entered the Asian Football Confederation in 2006, Jeonju and 
Jinan were probably not the kind of exotic destinations that captured the 
imagination but it is in these cities where Melbourne Victory and Sydney FC 
will either fall at the second round stage of the 2016Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> or progress to 
the last eight where things really get interesting.

The exit of Guangzhou Evergrande from a group that Sydney topped not only 
increased respect for the Sky Blues around Asia but made an open tournament 
that much more unpredictable. As one official from Thai champions Buriram 
United remarked when the draw was made in December “If Western Sydney Wanderers 
can do it, any team can do it.” And with Sydney and Melbourne achieving their 
first goal of a debut appearance in the knockout stage for the first time, 
there is no reason not to dream.

Melbourne Victory join Sydney FC in Asian Cup last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/melbourne-victory-join-sydney-fc-in-asian-cup-last-16>
Of the two, Melbourne have, on paper at least, the more difficult job over the 
two legs, the first of which is at home. Jeonbuk Motors are parked in the way. 
The Motors may be, like Victory, a headline writer’s dream but when it comes to 
experience in the knockout stages, there is no comparison. The Koreans have 
played more games in the tournament than any other and have finished at every 
stage: as winners, finalists, semi-finalists, quarter-finalists, at the round 
of 16 and the group stage.

When Group E was drawn in Kuala Lumpur, coach Choi Kang-hee was so happy back 
home that he called the club’s officials to express his delight at the easy 
opposition. That was before Jiangsu Suning spent $100 million on Brazilian 
talent and two of his players got sent off in a crazy 3-2 defeat in Vietnam. 
The Greens topped the group thanks to a nervy 2-2 draw with Jiangsu at home.

Jeonbuk have won the last two domestic titles and, more than any other club in 
Korea, want Asian success. After elimination in the last minute of the 
quarter-final last year, Choi went shopping. In came stars such as Kim 
Shin-wook, the almost two metres-tall 2014 World Cup striker , right-back Kim 
Chang-soo and, best of all, Kim Bo-kyung, whose form for Cerezo Osaka before 
heading to Europe in 2012, ensured that Japanese fans did not miss Shinji 
Kagawa.

Victory finished above Suwon Bluewings in the group stage (despite an inferior 
goal difference) but unlike Jeonbuk’s youthful compatriots, who played some 
good football but lacked a cutting edge, the Korean champions are powerful, 
battle-hardened and have firepower – Lee Dong-gook is the competition’s record 
goalscorer. The men from Jeonju are beatable though. They defend from the 
front, denying opponents space but if you can get to the final third, there are 
vulnerabilities in the defence that Alex Wilkinson left last season.

There is a feeling in Korea that Choi, despite all of his experience and 
success, struggles against a tactically astute and flexible coach. Kevin Muscat 
may be able to make a difference. Tuesday’s first leg in Melbourne will, of 
course, be crucial but Jeonbuk’s journey was made easier by the league allowing 
the club to reschedule the weekend’s K-League clash.

Shandong, meanwhile, share with their opponents Sydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> a contrast between domestic and 
continental form. The Australians didn’t even manage to make the A-League 
play-offs this season and only Asian exploits averted disaster. Shandong are 
not in their domestic title race, though any Asian advantage that may accrue 
from that is negated by the possibility of being sucked into a relegation 
battle.

Coach Mano Menezes is already under pressure and elimination at the hands of 
Sydney FC would not go down well. Were the axe to fall on the former Brazil 
boss, Sydney coach Graham Arnold would perhaps be in the running. He was 
quizzed on the chances of coaching in China when in Guangzhou earlier this 
month and diplomatically kept his options open.

Shandong have already won in Australia this year however, eliminating Adelaide 
United in the playoffs back in February. The Jinan club is not part of the 
Chinese nouveau riche and lifted the title in 2010 when the spending was just 
starting. Guangzhou Evergrande have won every championship since.

It took Shandong a little time to react to the changing environment in China 
but now there is the requisite big-name foreign coach in Menezes and big name 
Brazilians such as Diego Tardelli. He and compatriot Aloisio are obvious 
dangermen, or at least they were last season when Shandong finished third in 
the league. Hao Junmin, formerly of Schalke, and striker Yang Xu are 
established internationals andAustralian fans may remember goalkeeper Wang Dalei
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/12/ballboy-helps-china-goalkeeper-save-penalty>
 from the Asian Cup. He may not be quite as chatty with ballboys this time 
around though, as he and his defence have conceded 16 goals in the first nine 
games of the season. Sydney will be hoping to add to Wang’s pain.
 