
For those unsated by all 150 minutes of Noah, the Biblical-eco-epic that's 
laying waste to the US and is shortly to flood multiplexes the world over, 
there are a number of literary avenues to explore. There's the Bible, for 
starters – the relevant bits can be found in splashy opening chapter. The 
graphic novel, co-written by Aronofsky, with its
hard-night-at-the-fancy-dress-party cover 
<http://oyster.ignimgs.com/wordpress/stg.ign.com/2013/12/noah-01.jpg>. 

There's an official movie novelisation by Mark Morris (Crowe on front cover, 
big wave on the back). And the more slimline Noah: Isa's Story, a novel by 
Susan Korman, based on the screenplay, and focusing on Noah's entirely 
fabricated daughter-in-law (Emma Watson staring soulfully on the front, 
snogging in a forest on the back).

But for those who's already exhausted those, salvation is at hand in the form 
of four stanzas written by the 13-year-old Aronofsky in response to a homework 
assignment to write a poem about peace. The verse was read aloud by the 
director's seventh-grade teacher, Vera Fried, at the New York premiere of the 
film last week. Fried, reports Variety, has now retired to Florida, but the 
director tracked her down and rewarded her with a dedication in the 
soon-to-be-published coffee table making-of book, as well as couple of cameos. 
The first comes at the start, as a floating corpse, the second in a crowd scene 
in which she speaks toRussell Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe>.

Fried told Variety that although the experience of working with Crowe was a 
pleasant one, the actor doesn't float her boat. "I like older men," she said. 
"Anthony Hopkins would have done it for me." In Aronofsky's film, Crowe takes 
the title role of the man said to be around 600 at the time of the flood, while 
Hopkins is Methuselah, who was a sprightly 969.

Here's the original poem; feel free to critique it, or to paste your own 
movie-related poetry in the comments below.

The Dove

A poem by Darren Aronofsky
January 13, 1982

Evil was in the world
The laughing crowd
Left the foolish man at his ark
Filled with animals
When the rain began to fall
It was hopeless
The man could not take the evil crowd with him
But he was allowed to bring his good family.

The rain continued through the night
And the cries of screaming men filled the air
The ark was afloat
Until the dove returned with the leaf
Evil still existed.

When the rainbows reached throughout the sky
The humble man and his family knew what it meant
The animals ran and flew freely with their newborn
The fog rose and the sun shone
Peace was in the air
And it soon appeared in all of man's heart.

He knew evil would not be kept away
For evil and war could not be destroyed
But neither was it possible to destroy peace
Evil is hard to end and peace is hard to begin
But the rainbow and the dove will always live
Within every man's heart.
 