
No trade union leader since the second world war had to cope with such a 
catalogue of disasters, nor become so embroiled in a climate of political and 
industrial decline, as Norman Willis, the former general secretary of the 
Trades Union Congress, who has died aged 81. As TUC general secretary for nine 
years from 1984 and before that as No 2 toLen Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/may/21/obituaries.guardianobituaries>
 for almost 11 years, Willis was at the ringside, and then inside the ring, 
during what was one of the most traumatic and damaging periods in British trade 
union history.

The TUC had reached record membership levels of more than 12 million 
affiliated trade unionists under the leadership successively of George 
Woodcock, Victor Feather and Murray. The role of leading the TUC then fell to 
Willis – a jolly, humorous man. It was, however, a poisoned chalice. He 
presided over a period in which the very phrase "trade union" seemed to evoke 
ignominious response and even ridicule. When he took over from Murray – in 
mid-stream of the miners' strike – the decline inTUC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> membership had already begun. By the 
time Willis left Congress House in 1993, membership had dropped to below eight 
million.

Yet even those figures conceal the true depth of the trauma that Willis 
inherited: he took over from Murray at a time when Arthur Scargill's National 
Union of Mineworkers was already in serious retreat; whenMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
 was moving to her period of greatest strength and influence after the 
Falklands; and when public opinion began to see trade union membership as 
irrelevant.

No fair-minded observer could accuse Willis of being responsible for the 
debacle he inherited and tried to handle. The brutal truth is that no one could 
have achieved much better. The trade unions were the principal victims of the 
Thatcherite thunder, partly because of the developing anti-union legislation; 
partly due to the return of mass unemployment (it had already risen above three 
million when Willis took over); and finally because a central feature of 
Thatcher's political strategy was to slash the public sector, especially the 
nationalised industries, in which trade union strength was traditionally 
predominant.

Willis first came to the TUC at the end of 1973, shortly after Murray 
succeeded Feather to the top post. He began his work as assistant general 
secretary in the early months of 1974 when theHeath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives> 
government was tottering under the pressures of a miners' strike, the oil 
crisis and economic turbulence. The TUC was then a power in the land and the 
leader of its strongest affiliate,Jack Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/apr/23/jack-jones-obituary>, of the 
Transport and General Workers' Union, was singled out in opinion polls as 
holding more sway than prime ministers. Indeed it was Jones who nominated 
Willis – then a full-time TGWU official – for the TUC post, a move which some 
saw as Jones's tactical ploy to put his own man inside Congress House, 
something Willis always denied.

Willis was born in Hayes, then in Middlesex, the son of Jim, a barber and 
council worker, and Kate, who worked in laundries and canteens and whom Norman 
described as a "working-class suffragette" and his mentor. Both parents were 
active trade unionists and socialists. He was the youngest of five children and 
life was tough – though he never exaggerated the theme of childhood poverty. 
Even so, all the ingredients were in place for a life committed to trade 
unionism.

In later years Willis described one of his first introductions to writing 
poetry: "I wasn't aware of being particularly deprived. No one had very much 
then and we weren't poverty stricken. But I can remember the anxiety when the 
gas man was due to come. I wrote a poem about it..." His poetry developed 
throughout his period as a union official, and when he was TUC general 
secretary; he later served as vice-president of thePoetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Society. Another interest was 
embroidery and he wrote a column for CrossStitcher magazine from 1998 until 
2009.

He joined the TGWU as a 16-year-old office boy, at its central London 
headquarters in Transport House, straight from Ashford County grammar school. 
He was promoted to a clerical job in the union's education department, 
arranging courses for London busmen. He took some of the courses himself and 
then, aged 22, went to Ruskin College, Oxford, on a union-sponsored 
scholarship. He read philosophy and political science, and graduated after two 
years with a diploma which took him on to Oriel College, Oxford, where he 
gained a "good second" in 1959.

When he returned to the TGWU, he became research assistant to the general 
secretary Frank Cousins – at the moment when Cousins was turning round the 
union from stalwart Labour rightwing orthodoxy to a campaigning leftwing 
platform. Under Jones, Cousins's successor, Willis's promotion continued and in 
1970 he became the union's national secretary in charge of research and 
education. He also put a gentle foot into the political arena by becoming a 
member of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> group of 
Staines urban district council; but he carried no serious ambition to go 
further in the political field.

In 1974 he made the move to the TUC. Willis's appointment had been in the face 
of stiff competition from David Lea,Ken Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/23/guardianobituaries.politics>, Pat 
Fisher and Alan Hargreaves – all well-established TUC departmental heads with 
long experience; the fact that Willis won the post of assistant to Murray lent 
weight to the rumour that it was all the result of Jones's influence. Willis 
quickly became Murray's troubleshooter at large.

His big break came in 1976 when, in the middle of the crucial debate with the 
Wilson government over wage restraint, he deputised for Murray, who was 
recovering from a heart attack. A year later, he was formally appointed 
Murray's deputy – again coming ahead of Lea and Graham, both of whom became 
assistant general secretaries. At the annual conference in 1984, Willis 
succeeded Murray and was immediately thrust into the most difficult part of the 
miners' strike.

With Scargill at the head of the NUM determined to keep the TUC at arm's 
length, Willis found negotiating with the miners' leaders no easier than Murray 
had done. Scargill rejected compromise and was suspicious of any mediation by 
the TUC. Willis tried to bridge the widening gulf between the NUM leader and 
the rest of the Labour movement – including advising the then Labour leader,
Neil Kinnock <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/neil-kinnock>, with whom he 
was on very close terms and for whom his wife, Maureen, worked. But it was to 
no avail.

Willis even agreed to speak at a miners' meeting in South Wales, largely to 
save Kinnock from a possible rough-house. The response to Willis's appeal to 
them to seek a compromise deal was a hangman's noose that was slowly lowered 
from the rafters of the meeting hall until it rested close to his head.

One Sunday morning in April 1993, Willis phoned round the senior figures of 
the TUC general council to announce his decision to retire early; he had just 
turned 60 and had had enough. He was succeeded by John Monks.

Willis had travelled through the furnace; in his nine years, there had been 
three new acts of parliament tightening the legal curbs on the unions; the 
Murdoch print revolution, focused on Wapping, had virtually wiped out one of 
the traditional strongholds of trade unionism; Thatcher had carried out a ban 
on unions at GCHQ; the miners' defeat had created the worst climate of union 
despondency since the 1926 general strike; and membership slumped.

Willis tried to smile through the debacle but he spent more and more time 
composing poetry. He did become a convinced pro-European and in 1991 was 
elected president of the European TUC. He turned down a knighthood offered to 
him by John Major, just as he had turned aside a proposal from the Labour 
leader John Smith that he might consider going into the House of Lords. Both of 
these refusals were more than mere token rejections of the baubles of privilege 
– they were genuine reflections of the modest ambitions of an over-modest man.

Willis is survived by Maureen, whom he married in 1963, and their children, 
Liz and Andrew.

• Norman David Willis, trade union leader, born 21 January 1933; died 7 June 
2014

• Geoffrey Goodman died in 2013
 