
Police were attacked today with improvised grenades and petrol bombs as they 
responded to a security alert that temporarily shut down the main rail link 
between Belfast and Dublin.

A number of houses had to be evacuated in Lurgan, County Armagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh>, as army bomb disposal officers were 
sent to the Lake Street area, close to the Kilwilkie estate, in what turned out 
to be a hoax.

During the security operation, PSNI officers came under attack by a mob of 
around 30 people.

A PSNI spokesman said several officers had injuries to their hearing caused by 
the homemade grenades, one of which was thrown over the roof of a house on the 
estate.

The alert is the latest in a series of terrorist operations carried out by 
dissident republicans in North Armagh. The nationalist end of Lurgan is a 
stronghold for the Continuity IRA.

The SDLP assembly member Dolores Kelly condemned those behind this latest 
alert.

She said: "They have brought this town to a standstill preventing children 
from getting to school and people from going about their daily routine.

"Businesses have also been delayed from trading and people obstructed from 
getting to work. This town does not need any further setbacks particularly in 
the current economic recession.

"The people of Lurgan are angry and fed up with this type of activity. It is 
the community and the reputation of this town that are suffering most at the 
hands of these thugs."

The Alliance party chief whip in the Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> assembly praised PSNI officers 
who were caught up in the violence.

Kieran McCarthy said: "This type of activity has no place in our society. We 
are moving forward to a brighter, peaceful, shared future and we will not let a 
small number of individuals cause disruption and create fear. People want to 
get on with their lives without trouble like this, and I appeal to anyone who 
can help police catch those involved to contact them immediately.

"I want to praise the bravery of the police and I hope that the officers who 
were injured in these attacks make a speedy recovery."

In response to the recent dissident terrorist upsurge, Northern Irish police 
announced tonight that it was retaining full-time reserve officers until next 
year.

A PSNI statement on behalf of Matt Baggott, the chief constable said: "Further 
to recent discussions the chief constable, subject to funding being secured, 
has agreed to retain 225 full-time reserve officers until 31 March 2011.

"This is part of the overall policing strategy to provide further 
organisational resilience as the PSNI continues its drive to release officers 
back into front line service delivery. This move will also provide additional 
support to the increased operational work to disrupt the activities of criminal 
terrorists."
 