
The University of London is to merge its Institute of Latin American Studies 
and Institute of United States Studies to form an Institute for the Study of 
the Americas.

It is the latest move in a flurry of activity in universities around the UK as 
they try to strengthen departments for the next research assessment exercise in 
the face of mounting competition for funds.

More than 100 new professorial posts are being created as British universities 
scramble for top researchers to secure the all-important five and five-star 
grades on which future funding will depend.

The new institute will be established with effect from August 2004, under the 
direction of Professor James Dunkerley, currently the Institute of Latin 
American Studies director.

Commenting on the merger, the vice-chancellor, Sir Graeme Davies, said: "The 
combination of free-standing and comparative postgraduate teaching and research 
on all sections of the hemisphere within a single institution is unique in 
Europe.

"It represents a major commitment to American studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> by the university. The 
university has committed new resources to enhance the staffing complement in 
the United States."

The university pointed out that a strong intellectual argument for a new 
Americas approach had recently been made by Professor Felipe Fernández-Armesto 
of Queen Mary, University of London. In his recent book The Americas: a History 
of the Hemisphere, Professor Fernández-Armesto argues that it is impossible to 
understand the history of North, Central and South America in isolation.

"From the emergence of the first human civilisations through to the arrival of 
Europeans and up to today, the land mass has been bound together in a complex 
web of inter-relationships - from migration and trade to religion, slavery, 
warfare, culture, food and the spread of political ideas." There are nearly 40 
million US citizens of Hispanic background and culture."

Professor Dunkerley said the new institute would be energetically inclusive, 
seeking to involve North Americanist and Caribbeanist scholars throughout the 
UK in much the same way as the institute had played a leading role in promoting 
Latin American studies nationwide.

"The aim will be to serve and to strengthen national networks of US scholars," 
he said, adding that existing collegial ties between the new body and the 
Institute of Commonwealth Studies would be expanded to enhance the studies of 
Canada and the Caribbean.
 