
"Kids, you tried and you failed. The lesson is never try" – Homer Simpson.

Andy Murray could be forgiven if he was contemplating adopting this policy. He 
finds himself having to create his own history at the same time that the three 
players ahead of him have been busy rewriting the record books every time they 
turn up at a grand slam, and the same old story is getting a little tired now. 
This is his fifth semi-final in a row at a major tournament; the likeliest 
outcome is thatNovak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>
, the world No1 and favourite, will hand him a fourth defeat in a row. It is 
Murray's misfortune to be playing at a time when the standard at the top of the 
men's game has never reached such stratospheric heights before, when being 
outrageously talented isn't enough at the business end of a slam, you have to 
be a genius – and maintain that level for five sets. We saw as much when Roger 
Federer lost to Rafael Nadal yesterday. The Swiss legend was imperious for much 
of the first set, but the Spaniard, despite being below his terrifying best, 
pounced as soon as he glimpsed a way back into the match.

Murray is outrageously talented: this is obvious to all but a few dullards who 
perpetuate the clueless line that he is surly, a brat, a poor loser,a loser. 
Here's a player we should be proud of, who's reached the final of theAustralian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> and the US Open and 
the last four of every slam. He's No4 in the world. The fourth best at what he 
does in the world, words that should be hammered, preferably using a large 
mallet, into the head of every numbskull around who labels him a bottle-job for 
losing a final. The supposed acts of bottle-jobbery have come in finals against 
arguably the greatest player of all time, semi-finals against an improbable 
force of nature who beats the greatest player of all time every time they play 
and a final against the man on the other side of the net this morning. Djokovic 
isn't bad - he only won 70 matches out of 76 in 2011, winning three grand slams 
along the way.

Djokovic's first came against Murray in Melbourne last year, when he 
administered a death-by-1000-paper-cuts thrashing that seemed to go so quickly, 
it was more reminiscent of going to the doctor to have an injection. All the 
build-up, all the hype, all the fretting about the needle and before you know 
it, it's done without you even noticing. The tennis match started and then the 
tennis match ended and Djokovic was off to collect his winnings, Murray left in 
a helpless daze.

The general consensus is that Murray's problem is not so much in his hands but 
in his head, and he'll have to put that defeat out of his mind if he is to 
stand any chance of causing an upset. To his credit, under the tutelage of Ivan 
Lendl, the on-court tantrums seem to have abated over the last fortnight, 
though that is partly down to a rather favourable path through. He avoided 
matches against Gael Monfils and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, while Mikhail Kukushkin 
retired in the fourth round and Kei Nishikori ran out of juice in the quarters. 
The real test comes now, though he will be encouraged by the way Djokovic was 
huffing, puffing and feeling his injured thigh during his quarter-final against 
David Ferrer. Then again, he did win.

Head-to-head record: For two players who grew up together, they have met only 
once in a grand slam - the aforementioned Australian Open final last year. 
Overall Djokovic leads 6-4 and Murray won their last encounter in the 
Cincinnati Masters last August, when the Serbian retired in the second set. And 
then went on to beat Rafael Nadal in the final of the US Open.

They're out on court at: 8.30am.

I've been in the office since: 5am.

The first email. In this minute-by-minute anyway. "Multi-talented," says Clare 
Davies, grossly overestimating my cricket knowledge. I think you are right and 
Djokovic will win but hopefully Murray (with his new Ivan face on) will put up 
a good fight. I'll be keeping an eye on your coverage of this match whilst 
following Smyth on the OBO."

Here's more support for Murray. "I wholeheartedly agree with your comments on 
the dullards who moan about Murray's performances in the recent majors," says 
Craig McEwan in Pertgh. "I for one am encouraged by what I have seen so far 
from Melbourne and expect to see him do well tonight. He may not win this one, 
but he will be better and I expect him to win a major final this year. So 
there." It makes sense that he will, but it also makes sense that he won't. If 
that makes sense. To do so, he most likely has to play the perfect match - 
twice.

Those of you who joined me for the cricket earlier will have seen my broadside 
against cardigans. "This cardigan 
<http://images.search.yahoo.com/search/images?_adv_prop=image&fr=yfp-t-372&va=federer+cardigan>
 was the beginning of the end for Federer," says Dominic Cole. Someone lost it 
with me last year for saying Federer would never win another slam. He hasn't 
since then and he won't from here.

More pre-match emails.

"Haven't you got this the wrong way round?" says Jonathan Blaney. "Murray is 
the beneficiary of the massive increase in standards in men's tennis, which has 
produced three of the greatest players playing at the same time. Affluence, 
ease of travel, and the proliferation of tennis academies for young players 
must have contributed to this leap in quality. I'm not denying Murray's talent, 
but he grew up at a time when it could be developed in a Scottish teenager and 
allow him to go to Barcelona for coaching. If he'd been born 20 years earlier 
would this have happened? It is Murray's fortune to be playing at this time, 
but that fortune is also shared by others with extraordinary natural talent." 
No. It's ifs, buts and maybes, but he would surely have won a grand slam by now 
if he'd been playing 10 years ago. Let's say, for example, the 2001 Wimbledon.

"Andy Murray can look forward to an upset on the cards Indian Cricket team is 
playing on Day 5 tomorrow - the first time this series," says Krishna Moorthy. 
"So anything can happen if Murray loses to Djoker (as expected) he can take 
solace in the fact he does not have to meet him at Adelaide, Sydney and Perth."

"I completely agree that Murray is generally brilliant but he has to be judged 
on his own standards," says Niall Mullen. "He hasn't really turned up in any of 
the 3 slam finals against players he has beaten many times. Whenever Greg 
Norman blew a major chance no-one doubted his talent just his nerve keeping 
ability. It's legitimate to ask the same questions of the otherwise superb 
tennis playerAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>." True. 
Though it's worth pointing out he had nothing left in the tank in 2009 when he 
reached the US Open final. The big disappointment, more so than last year given 
what Djokovic went on to achieve, was the defeat to Federer here in 2010.

"Murray will get slaughtered tonight if he plays as badly as he did 
Wednesday," notes Andrew Webb. "His serving was really, really, really bad. I 
reckon Murray will be lucky to win a grand slam - but purely down to bad luck 
in terms of his timing." The only glimmer of hope there is that Djokovic's 
serving against Ferrer was also dismal.

Fight! Fight! Fight! "What is Jonathan Blainey on about?" blasts Guy Hornsby. 
"Murray should be glad because coaching is better? Judy Murray was the first 
reason - long before Barcelona - that both he and his brother were playing 
tennis. Reading what I have about her, I'd have expected her to have done the 
same in the 70s or 80s. And since when has a first class seat on a plane 
dictated players being better? What absolute nonsense. Murray is a craftsman in 
an era of power players and in any era since Borg/McEnroe retired before 
Federer he'd have a couple of slams. But there's still time, a few years yet, 
and I think he'll do it."

Mats Wilander reckons Djokovic is nervous. And that Murray is nervous. We'll 
see. He also reckons Murray will win in five sets. He'll have to get a lot of 
those tennis shots over the net if he wants to! Do some really good tennis and 
he'll be fine is what I'm saying.

The players come out to a rocking ovation. There's big support for Djokovic in 
the crowd, though there are a fair few Scottish flags dotted around the 
stadium. "Yesterday I sneaked out of my office(at home) to watch the entire 
match," says Anthony O Connell. Today I will check in on it the odd bit here 
with you, that's the difference in class as far as I'm concerned. My prediction 
is Novak in 3 comfortable sets and then he will do the same to Nadal."

The toss.  No idea who won it, but it was tails. Andrew Castle spoke over it. 
Thanks BBC!

Tok! Tok! Tokity Tok! The players are knocking up now. "I need to play patient 
tennis and hit my shots at the right time," says Murray.

John Blom is the umpire. He tells the players they've got one more minute. 
"That was a lovely Simpsons quote earlier," says Kevin Comber. " I think this 
one fits nicely also if Andy went seeking support from his father after yet 
another Semi-Final Defeat. Bart/Andy: 'You make me sick, Homer (Murray Senior)! 
You're the one who told me I could be the best at anything if I just put my 
mind to it.' Homer/Murray Senior: 'Well, now that you're a little bit older, I 
can tell you that's a crock! No matter how good you are at something, there's 
always about a million (or three in this case) people better than you!'"

First set: Djokovic* 1-0 Murray (* denotes server): Here we go then. Hold on 
to your hats, it could be a rocky ride. Djokovic opens the serving - he won the 
toss, I assume - and Murray hits a forehand long off the first serve. The next 
rally lasts far longer, before Djokovic booms a forehand down the line and 
Murray's backhand drifts past the baseline again. Djokovic goes 40-0 up, but 
Murray gives himself a little bit of encouragement, easing himself into the 
match as the favourite fires into the net. Not that it makes a great deal of 
difference, as Murray then hits wide. An easy hold for Djokovic then. "I'm most 
looking forward to the hilarious shouts of "come on Tim" and the perpetual myth 
that he's British when he wins and Scottish when he loses," says Jamie 
Waterson. "Should be a brilliant match though and here's hoping it will be a 
Murray win."

First set: Djokovic 1-1 Murray*: It's crucial that Murray gets off to a good 
start. The feeling is that he needs to win the first set to stand any chance, 
especially given the way he sometimes lets adversity affect him. But Djokovic 
is well on top, dominating almost every point from the off. Before Murray knows 
it, he's 0-30 down, Djokovic's defence forcing errors to creep into his game. 
Though he wins the next point with a superb backhand down the line, he quickly 
gives up two break points with a poor drop-shot that Djokovic easily reads. 
He's at the net as quick as a flash, dinks one back and Murray can only hit 
wide. Murray rescues the first break point with a strong second serve into 
Djokovic's body and then the second as Djokovic widly hammers a forehand wide. 
Murray then hangs on in the next point and Djokovic eventually drills a 
backhand long. What follows is then brilliant, the pair of them absolutely 
welting the ball back and forth over the net and with neither man on top, 
Djokovic blinks first and can't beat the net with a forehand. A huge hold for 
Murray.

First set: Djokovic* 2-1 Murray: The standard of play and the pace of this 
match is already frightening. Djokovic begins this game with a pinpoint 
backhand winner that lands plum on the baseline; Murray follows up with a 
booming backhand of his own to bring it back to 15-all. Djokovic then misses a 
backhand by a whisker, offering Murray a little chance at 15-30, only for the 
Scot to overcook a forehand on second serve. But Murray's now given Djokovic to 
think about after that whirlwind start, and the world No1 completely misjudges 
a forehand, running into it too early and skewing it well long to give Murray 
his first break point. Djokovic rescues himself with a big second serve down 
the middle though, and Murray can only block his forehand into the net. An ace 
gets him out of a sticky situation, and Murray then lands a backhand long. This 
is fascinatingly poised. Both players have had break points, but none have been 
taken. Yet. This could be a classic. "I have always had sympathy for Andy 
Murray because the seeding has meant he has always had to beat both Federer and 
Nadal to win a major," says Ken Danbury. "I know others had to as well but 
because he always had to meet them in succession, usually semi and final, that 
was a big ask. Anyway, we'll see. Djorky can't have another year like last 
year, can he?"

First set: Djokovic 3-1 Murray*: Oh dear. This was a poor game from Murray, 
which hands Djokovic an early advantage. This is not an opponent who needs free 
gifts like Murray offered up here. At 15-all, he came into the net and got his 
backhand volley all wrong, dropping it meekly into the net. He gets it back to 
30-all, but is quickly facing a break point - and at the worst possible moment, 
he serves up a double fault. The response from Murray will be interesting now.

First set: Djokovic* 3-2 Murray: And here's the instant response from Murray! 
Djokovic is not firing on all cylinders yet and he can't close the game out, a 
double fault bringing it back to deuce. Murray loses the next point however, 
and then complains to the umpire about an unsteady screen in the background 
unsettling him, drawing a cry of "Come on princess!" from the crowd. Isn't that 
charming? Sometimes Murray lets outside factors affect him, but not here and he 
stays with Djokovic, who hands him a break point with an awful high volley into 
the net, a shot that simply had to be put away. He's already wasted one break 
point in the previous game, but there's no reprieve for Djokovic this time. 
Murray's huge hitting has him well in control of the point, and he seizes the 
opportunity with a glorious backhand winner into the left corner. As I said, 
this could be a classic. He simply must hold now. Djokovic is livid with 
himself for letting that slip away. "This 'any other era and he'd have won 
several majors' really is loser talk," says Niall Mullen. "He's in this era so 
get on with it. It's also pretty unlikely that Doc Brown is going to DeLorean 
him back to a time when Jim Courrier was world no.1." It's not loser talk, it's 
merely acknowledgement of the outstanding levels the top three, never seen 
before in the game, have reached.

First set: Djokovic 4-2 Murray*: But he can't hold. In a grand slam 
semi-final, it's not good enough from Murray. Two dreadful backhands, one into 
the net and one so far wide it was almost out of the stadium gives Djokovic 
three break points and he only needs one as Murray whacks a forehand into the 
net. That's unforgivable from Murray. He doesn't need to make it this easy for 
Djokovic.

First set: Djokovic* 5-2 Murray: At 0-15, Djokovic curves an ace down the 
middle, a serve that's so good even the line judge can't get out of the way. 
Though she's not hurting as much as Murray right now: he slams a forehand into 
the right corner and hurtles into the net, so Djokovic just whips an 
unstoppable forehand past him and into the open court. He closes out the game 
with a second ace. As ever, Murray is very good, but Djokovic is better. At the 
moment, it's rather difficult to see how Murray can win this match. Murray goes 
back to his chair and asks for an ice towel. That's not going to be enough.

First set: Djokovic 5-3 Murray*: Murray at least makes Djokovic serve for the 
set. A correct challenge from him after a huge forehand into the right corner 
gives him a 30-15 lead and from there it turns into a rather surprisingly 
simple game, Djokovic hitting a few yards wide with a backhand down the line to 
hand it to Murray. Now he has to break. Well, he's already done it once.

Djokovic wins the first set 6-3: Someone have a word with the BBC - I think 
they've put a repeat on by mistake. At 15-all, Murray has a presentable chance 
to edge ahead in the game, but his cross-court forehand lands wide. Would 
Djokovic have missed? It's unlikely. Djokovic then drags him out wide again, 
forcing Murray to go for a big winner, and a forehand into the net gives 
Djokovic two set points. He only needs one, racing into the net to punch a 
volley into the right corner that Murray can do nothing with. Come on Tim! 
"It's really the top 3 can beat anyone, then Murray who can beat anyone except 
the top 3 then the rest who can pretty much beat anyone except the top 3 and 
Murray," says Anthony O Connell. "It's like 3 leagues!"

Second set: Djokovic 6-3, 1-0 Murray*:  What's the French for deja-vu? 
Djokovic has an answer for everything Murray presents him with and he's broken 
again to take a commanding lead. It's almost like he snuck into his hotel room 
and had a peek at his gameplan last night*. At 30-all, Murray plays a drop-shot 
that would be enough against most players, but Djokovic speeds forward, drills 
a forehand over to put Murray on the defensive, and his attempted lob lands 
long. Murray hands Djokovic the game with a tame backhand into the net. Which 
idiot said this was going to be a classic?

Legal disclaimer: The Guardian is not claiming that Novak Djokovic snuck into 
Andy Murray's hotel room last night.

Second set: Djokovic* 6-3, 2-0 Murray:  Murray simply makes too many errors 
when he gives himself a slight opening, a useless forehand into the net at 
15-30 letting Djokovic off. He then wonks a backhand wide, the errors 
continuing to mount up, and after a long rally, a lazy backhand drops long. 
From 15-30, he just stood aside and allowed Djokovic to win three easy points. 
"While not taking a stance on the cardigan question, I do like to see the 
tennis players dressed properly in whites," says Clare Davies. "Djokovic 
deserves to win not just for playing better tennis, but because he is dressed 
properly. Murray looks a shambles in his red and blue. It's like having a Test 
player on the same field as an ODI-er and I know which I prefer!"

Second set: Djokovic 6-3, 2-1 Murray*:  From the sublime to the ridiculous 
from Murray. He goes 0-30 down quickly, and rescues that situation with some 
huge serves, including an ace, to go 40-30 up. Having seemingly quelled the 
danger, he then picks the worst possible time to double fault, and let Djokovic 
back into it. Murray's crumbling forehand then continues to let him down, and 
he slaps one into the net to give Djokovic a break point. Surprisingly he fails 
to take it though, an apparently simple forehand going wide, and Murray comes 
up with an ace and then seals the game as Djokovic casually plonks a drop-shot 
into the net. That should serve as a kick up the backside for Murray, who was 
threatening to let the game just drift away from him without anything even 
resembling a fight. "Just to mention that Wilander thought after the 1st set 
yesterday Federer was going to win," says Tony. "Not always good to listen to 
him in predictions. So far not the best record."

Second set: Djokovic* 6-3, 2-2 Murray: Maybe this will wake him up! Murray 
sends a laser-guided backhand deep into the left corner and when Djokovic lifts 
it back up, Murray is quickly at the net and rattles a Pete Sampras style 
overhead away to go 0-15 up. He then produces a similar backhand that has 
Djokovic falling all over himself to reach it, and Murray again puts the 
overhead away to go 0-30 up. What a chance this is. But then, what a player 
Djokovic is. A brilliant forehand that lands right on the line stops Murray and 
as if that wasn't enough, an impossibly good backhand down the line somehow 
clips the outside edge of the line. Murray challenges it, but in vain. The pair 
then duke it out some more, Djokovic throwing in a double fault at 40-30 for 
good measure, before an incredible point. Murray should have lost it, but his 
defence was, well, Djokovic-esque, as he managed to return an overhead from the 
Serb and eventually flick an exceptional cross-court backhand past Djokovic to 
bring it back to deuce. When Murray's backhand is on song, he has a chance and 
it sparkles again as he places a backhand past a statuesque Djokovic for a 
break point. He can't take the first, but quickly gets another. Djokovic throws 
everything at him in a bid to win the point, but Murray strains to reach every 
shot, get it back and finally, at long last, Djokovic sends a shot past the 
baseline. Murray has broken back! We've got a game on our hands again, just as 
it looked like it was becoming a procession.

Second set: Djokovic 6-3, 2-3 Murray*: The crowd appears to be with Murray, 
mainly because he's showing great fighting qualities. When he fizzes a forehand 
past Djokovic to go 15-0 up, they respond with a huge cheer. At 30-15, a 
stretching Djokovic can't reach a booming serve down the middle, and though he 
gets the next one back over the net, Murray, now with all the bristling energy 
of a hyperactive toddler, is there to smash it away. I say!

Second set: Djokovic* 6-3, 2-4 Murray: Is this the work of a choker? Or is it 
the work of a marvellous tennis player? At the moment, it's decidedly the 
latter. Djokovic crashes a forehand down the line, and Murray responds by 
whacking one from right to left and past a flailing Djokovic. He then lures 
Djokovic into the net and the passing shot is judged to perfection, Murray 
taking a 0-30 lead. Problem is, there's another marvellous tennis player on the 
other side of the net, and faced with a challenge, two cracking forehands into 
the left corner from Djokovic haul him level. But not for long! This is now an 
outstanding match, each point packed with astonishing shotmaking. Djokovic 
can't quite shake Murray off at 30-all, and eventually fires into the net to 
give up a break point. Can he take it? You bet, as Djokovic, now feeling the 
strain, sends a backhand long. From 2-0 down, Murray has won four games in a 
row.

Second set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-4 Murray*: This is a fantastic match. I know I 
keep saying it, but it bears repeating. At 0-15, Djokovic tries a drop-shot, 
trying to bring Murray out of his comfort zone. No dice, Murray reads it and 
just dinks a forehand winner away. A timely ace gives him a 30-15 lead, but 
then there's a reminder of what Djokovic can do, a backhand on the rise 
pummelled away after a short forehand from Murray. And then a disaster for 
Murray, as he flicks an easy forehand wide to give Djokovic a break point. He 
can't take the first after another smashing point, but gives Djokovic another 
chance with a double fault and this time there's no escape as he hits a 
forehand into the net. He was ahead, but now the momentum is back with 
Djokovic. If he loses this match, this will be where he lost it. This set has 
now lasted 50 minutes. The first set was 47 minutes.

Second set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-5 Murray: What's going on? Everyone's serve has 
gone to pieces. At 0-15, Djokovic, the world No1, serves a double fault which, 
if nothing else, will delight Rafael Nadal. A cat-and-mouse rally follows, both 
players slowing the pace for a while, and Murray ends it by knocking a backhand 
into the net. A bizarre sequence follows. Djokovic arrows a briliant forehand 
into the right corner, which Murray somehow lobs back. For some reason, 
Djokovic just wandered over and instead of putting it away, he let Murray back 
into the rally, eventually losing it and giving up two break points. There are 
some weird moments in Djokovic matches. He saves the first, a shot from Murray 
clipping the top of the net and agonisingly landing on his side - and then 
exactly the same thing happens to Djokovic! Murray will now serve for the 
second set. "Apologies for having missed out on the earlier fashion 
discussion," says Fashion's Hadley Freeman. "I was, to be blunt, asleep. But I 
am very pleased that the sports liveblogs have been well and truly turned into 
fashion forums, and I am especially pleased at the strength of fashion opinions 
among the Guardian sports community. On the subject of a mauve cardigan, I 
think I shall refrain from commenting." It looks a bit likethis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B005CVWU1Y/ref=asc_df_B005CVWU1Y6303528/?tag=googlecouk06-21&creative=22134&creativeASIN=B005CVWU1Y&linkCode=asn>
.

Murray wins the second set 6-3 to make it 1-1 in sets: Now Murray has to carry 
out the impossible: hold. Good luck with that - two bad errors, two shots into 
the net, give Djokovic two break points. First serves please! He rescues the 
first, crunching an ace down the middle and then the second, Djokovic letting 
him off with a wayward forehand that goes wide. Now Djokovic is puffing away, 
particularly after a wild forehand that goes long that brings up set point for 
Murray. And would you believe it, he takes it, Murray booming a fierce serve 
that Djokovic can't return. Wow. Murray was 2-0 down at the start of this set, 
was close to going 3-0 down and now look! Choker? There's your choker. As a 
treat, here's an in-game gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2012/jan/27/australian-open-2012-in-pictures>
.

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 1-0 Murray: Djokovic probably wasn't expecting 
this - we've become so accustomed to Murray disappearing after setbacks in 
these games, but not this time. Even if he loses, it's just great to see him 
playing to his potential against the best player in the world. There's no 
let-up from Murray at the start of this set either. At 30-all, Djokovic, 
increasingly fatigued, flashes a backhand wide to give Murray a break point. 
The rally goes to and fro, but Djokovic stops it, claiming a backhand from went 
long. If he's wrong, the game goes to Murray, but he's right and he hangs in 
there. Djokovic glares at the umpire. He's not happy out there, and Murray's 
making all the running now, quickly getting another break point as Djokovic 
hits a forehand into the net. An awesome forehand down the line from Djokovic 
is too good for Murray though. Another backhand into the net isn't though. A 
third break point for Murray. Third time lucky? No, Murray unable to withstand 
three smashes from Djokovic. A fourth chance goes begging. So does a fifth, 
Djokovic finding the line with an immense forehand. Incredibly Djokovic holds. 
That could prove pivotal. "Those first two sets look to have taken more out of 
Djokovic than Murray," says Adam Hirst. "He looks tired out there. Murray looks 
slightly less so, despite always looking tired. He's fresher." Spot on there, 
Adam, but you never know what's really going on with Djokovic.

Third set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 1-1 Murray*: That last game was punishing stuff, 
lasting nearly 15 minutes. Not least for me. But wouldn't you know it, having 
wasted five break points in the last game, Murray lets his concentration slip 
on his serve. He goes 15-30 down, but two big first serves allow him to 
backhand and forehand winners away. Murray then polishes it off, wrongfooting 
Djokovic with a disguised forehand winner into the right corner. "There is no 
shame in losing tennis matches to players who are better than you and it must 
be somewhat annoying for him to have this choker tag thrown in his face 
whenever he loses to one of them," says Niall Howarth. "But what can he do he's 
probably got a team of psychologists who forbid him from saying out loud, 'It's 
not my fault they're just better than me.' But they are and there's no shame in 
that!"

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 1-2 Murray: Djokovic could do with an easy hold 
here. He hasn't had one since the first game of the second set. He's not going 
to get it though. At 0-15, Murray whacks a forehand deep into the left corner 
and then cushions a delicate volley away. The increasingly sloppy Djokovic then 
blocks a backhand long to give Murray three break points. Murray wastes the 
first two in sloppy fashion, but Djokovic can't rescue a third. Murray thumps a 
forehand to the left, a tactic that is bringing him great rewards, and then 
puts the smash away. This match, it goes without saying, is there for the 
taking. But don't be stupid enough to write off Novak Djokovic. It's far from 
over. "Wow, Hadley Freeman slumming it on the sports pages," says Niall Mullen. 
"Does that mean if we talk politics Polly Toynbee will e-mail in?"

Third set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 2-2 Murray*: An immediate chance for Djokovic to 
break back, as Murray, off-balance, puts a forehand wide to give him two break 
points. Typically enough, Murray lands a backhand long and Djokovic is back in 
it. "Hi there, amazingly I'm still awake and following this match and the 
cricket, and I have to point out that as neither Murray nor Djoko are South 
African, the tag of choker cannot be applied to either," says Clare Davies. "At 
risk of cross-contaminating GU sporting threads, I am tempted to sign off this 
email with #endofexclamationmark." #STOPHASHTAGS

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 3-2 Murray: Gorgeous. Murray races into the net 
after an aggressive return and then touches a cute backhand volley over the net 
for 0-15. A double-fault from Djokovic, who looks so despondent, gives Murray 
another glimmer. It seems like Djokovic is 0-30 down on every service game - 
they might as well just play it from there. Sloppy play from Murray allows 
Djokovic to get it back to 40-30 though. Which is the cue for him to rediscover 
his previous fluidity and bring it to deuce with a clever forehand. More 
slackness from Djokovic gives Murray a break point - how many times has that 
been written so far - but he mistimes a simple forehand into the net. From 
there, Djokovic holds. Every game is like a five-set match in their own right.

Third set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 3-3 Murray*: Some of Djokovic's effort to reach 
lost causes is amazing. It doesn't always come off, but still, what stamina and 
speed. I suppose it puts doubts in Murray's mind, reminds him that every shot 
needs to be perfect. Murray holds convincingly enough, though there were two 
wonderful backhand returns from Djokovic here. "Thanks to Hadley Freeman," says 
Richard Cawley. "I've just ordered and sent the mauve cardigan to Andy. I added 
a note to say that Ivan can wear it for the final, if he himself doesn't wish 
to. That should put Rafa off his stride either way."

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 4-3 Murray: Djokovic reacts to an ace as if 
he'd won the whole tournament. Well done Novak! Well done, you've done an ace. 
There's no such shenanigans from Murray though after a monstrous forehand 
winner down the line for 15-30. This time he can't eke out a break point 
though, another ace from Djokovic the highlight of the game. Suddenly he looks 
like he's gathered himself. Will Murray regret not taking his chances at the 
start of this set?

Third set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 4-4 Murray*: Now it's Murray's turn to go 0-30 
down on his serve. The pendulum is swinging back in Djokovic's favour. Djokovic 
lets him off though - at 15-30, he mistimes his backhand return off a soft 
second serve. Murray regains his equilibrium and pushes a backhand winner into 
the right corner, and then wins the game after a storming rally with a forehand 
into the opposite side. Neither man is giving an inch now. What a match.

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 5-4 Murray: An extraordinary slice of luck for 
Murray on the first point! Djokovic blows the chance to put a forehand away and 
as the point drags on, a forehand from Murray flicks off the top of the net and 
deflects past Djokovic, who couldn't adjust. At deuce, Murray gets pulled out 
wide and tries to play a backhand winner down the line, but finds the net 
instead. That was a tired shot. Djokovic closes the game out with an ace and 
now Murray has to serve to stay in a set he probably should have won by now. 
"My dad, a non sports fan is over in Melbourne at the moment visiting family," 
says Alex Warwick. "He's currently watching this game and has just texted his 
joy at finally understanding why I've been wasting my life watching sport for 
the past 30 years."

Third set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 5-5 Murray*: This is a different Djokovic now - 
the Djokovic we saw in the first set. He opens up this game by running around 
the ball and knocking an unplayable forehand down the line. But this is also a 
different Murray to the one we saw in the first set and he responds to that 
setback with two big serves to go 30-15 up. Djokovic then forces an error from 
Murray with another forehand down the line and then earns a set point, Murray 
firing a forehand long. Not the worst time for Murray to serve up an ace out 
wide then. It's not long before he's facing another break point though, a lob 
not good enough to beat Djokovic. Not the worst time for Murray to come up with 
a brilliant wide forehand on to the line then. But the pressure is starting to 
tell: Murray doesn't quite catch a volley right, and then puts an overhead 
backhand into the net to give Djokovic a third chance. Again he rescues it 
though - and what a time to play a drop-shot! Djokovic gets it back over the 
net, but Murray is there win the point with a backhand down the line. Djokovic 
then misjudges a serve from Murray, and Murray gets lucky with two net cords, 
the second enough to cause Djokovic to knock a backhand well wide. This is 
gruelling, gutsy stuff.

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 5-6 Murray: And now it's Djokovic's turn to 
come under pressure, neat backhand returns from Murray giving him a 15-30 lead. 
Murray then goes toe-to-toe with Djokovic, trading shots from the back of the 
court, waiting for his opening and then bringing up two break points with a 
fabulous forehand winner. He wastes the first, taking a backhand a bit too 
early and sending it into the net. But then the stadium erupts as Murray 
summons up all his defensive powers, hangs on to Djokovic's coat-tails and 
waits for the Serbian to slice a backhand past the baseline. I'm not making 
this up: Andy Murray will now serve for the third set. "The weather here in 
Melbourne is very oppressive," says Neill Brown. "I am in my flat, barely a 
mile a way from Rod Laver Arena and there is no breeze at all; the temperature 
is 26c with 60% humidity. Even from the comfort of my balcony overlooking the 
Yarra river (yeah, I'm showing off but I was born and grew up in Watford so I'm 
sure you can forgive me), I'm uncomfortably warm. Given that the court has none 
of these comforts, the physical effort being made by both players should not be 
underestimated right now; lesser men would have thrown in the towel at least an 
hour ago."

Third set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-6 Murray: Will Murray's nerve hold? One 
thing's for sure, Djokovic isn't about to make it easy for him. At 15-0, he 
yoinks Murray into the net and then plays a perfect backhand lob over him. And 
Murray won't make it easy for himself either, as his tiredness betrays him with 
a double-fault, before he rams a forehand way long to give Djokovic two chances 
to break back. The first goes begging, Djokovic pulling a cross-court forehand 
wide, as confirmed by a challenge, but he can't rescue two: Djokovic gets a 
good length on a forehand to catch Murray off-guard and his backhand goes wide. 
This is pure agony. For the players as well, not just me.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic* 0-1 Murray: First blood to Murray in the 
tie-break, as Djokovic slices a backhand into the net.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic 1-1 Murray*: Unbelievable. The mini-break is 
eroded as Djokovic just comes out on top at the net, forcing Murray to 
eventually hit long.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic 1-2 Murray*: A bouncer from Murray fools 
Djokovic, whose backhand goes long.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic* 1-3 Murray: Djokovic double-faults!

Third set tie-break: Djokovic* 2-3 Murray: Murray whacks a dire forehand long, 
but he still has the mini-break.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic 3-3 Murray*: Too good from Djokovic, whose 
backhand volley at the net is enough to beat Murray.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic 3-4 Murray*: Murray needed an ace here. He got 
an ace. Over to you, Novak.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic* 3-5 Murray: A brilliant return of serve from 
Murray, and Djokovic slices long!

Third set tie-break: Djokovic* 3-6 Murray: Murray dominates an astonishing 
rally, and finally manages to wrongfoot Djokovic with a forehand into the 
right-hand corner! He now has three set points, two on his own serve.

Third set tie-break: Djokovic 4-6 Murray*: You'd expect nothing less. Djokovic 
overpowers Murray, moves into the net and then casually beats him with a 
forehand.

Murray wins the third set 7-6 to lead 2-1 in sets! Murray plays a forehand out 
wide, and Djokovic, on the stretch, sends a cross-court forehand wide! Phew! 
How long was that third set? 90 minutes? I've been up since 4.30am, but I'm not 
as tired as these two must be. Andy Murray is now a set away from beating Novak 
Djokovic. What a turnaround.

Fourth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7 1-0 Murray*: A two-second toilet break for 
me, and we're back. At 15-30, Murray brings some expletives out of your 
reporter by thrashing a forehand volley well long. What on earth was he playing 
at there? Two break points. The first is saved, though he nearly mucks up 
another overhead; Djokovic's scavenging is out of this world. Murray can't save 
the second one though, his forehand going long. That was loose. Murray now 
knows what he's going to have to do to close this out. "That was absolutely 
epic," says Fraser Thomas. "People who don't like sport have no soul."

Fourth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7 2-0 Murray: Back in his hotel, Rafael 
Nadal is watching this all unfolf, and having a wee chuckle. This monstrous 
match only suits him. Djokovic holds to love. Is that the first time that's 
happened in the entire match?

Fourth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 3-0 Murray*: Epic? That doesn't cover it. 
We're going to need to invent a new word for this match the way it's going. 
Murray's going through a little slump at the moment though, giving Djokovic a 
chance for a double-break with a long forehand. Sure enough, Djokovic takes it, 
Murray pulling a two-handed backhand wide. It looks like it's going to a fifth. 
Ebb and flow, ebb and flow. "Last time I emailed I was stuck backstage at the 
kings head theatre trying to follow the Wimledon final, now I'm stuck on lunch 
duty in a primary school," says Cameron Harris. "Why can't Murray organise his 
schedule around the times of good, hard working, ordinary citizens who as a 
point of principle dont take any work that pays more than minimum wage? Thats 
modern sportsmen for you. Out of touch."

Fourth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 4-0 Murray: Another hold to love for 
Djokovic, who's now coming up with aces with increasing regularity. Murray 
looks like he's giving this set up. "What does Unfolf mean?" smarms William 
Brown, who finds typos in a report that's been going since 7.30am to be the 
most hilarious thing in the world.

Fourth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 4-1 Murray*: Murray gets on the scoreboard 
in this set, holding to 15. Djokovic still has a double-break though. "Who'll 
be celebrating," says Sean Turner. "After that set, Nadal."

Fourth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 5-1 Murray: Maybe he's not ready to let 
go just yet. He wins his first point on Djokovic's serve for the first time in 
this set with a swinging volley to go 0-15 up, and then a Djokovic error makes 
it 15-30. All of a sudden, it's Djokovic making the errors, and a wide backhand 
gives Murray two break points. He can't take either though, two backhands 
dropping apologetically into the net. "Easy!" bellows Murray. Less of that, 
please. Just move on. From there, Djokovic closes out the game, swatting a 
cross-court Murray forehand back into the wide open court. "Murray cannot give 
away the momentum now because he won't get it back," says Anthony O Connell. 
"You can't switch off for a set and then switch back on."

Djokovic wins the fourth set 6-1 to make it 2-2 in sets: We're going to a 
fifth. Ferocious hitting from Djokovic, including an imperious backhand return, 
gives him a 0-30 lead, and he then earns three set points with a forehand down 
the line. Murray's barely moving now, and Djokovic needs just one chance, 
smashing a backhand return down the line to level it up. That set took 25 
minutes; the third took 88.

Fifth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 1-0 Murray: This is the biggest set 
of Murray's career to date. To mark it, he's had a change of shirt. He's now 
wearing white, just like Djokovic. I wouldn't want to be in charge of handling 
the one he's taken off. At 40-0, Djokovic serves up a double-fault and for 
reasons best left to him, decides to challenge the second serve. What's the 
point of that?

Fifth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 1-1 Murray*: Come at the king, best 
not miss. Djokovic has reacted to Murray taking the second and third sets with 
utmost disdain, almost affronted that anyone might dare test him to such an 
extent. In that context, this is an almighty hold for Murray, especially as he 
had to come back from 0-15. He closes it out with an ace. Djokovic is rampant, 
but this is terrific spirit from Murray.

Fifth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 2-1 Murray: Murray's rediscovered a 
little bit of his swagger now, and will be encouraged to hear Djokovic grunting 
as he hits the ball. There hasn't been much of that since the start of the 
fourth set. At 30-15, the pair duke it out from the baseline, before Murray 
chips a drop-shot over. Djokovic gets there, Murray lobs him, Djokovic gets 
back, and then knocks a forehand wide. It's not enough to properly threaten 
Djokovic's serve though. But Andy Murray has decided to join in again."I just 
started following for the fourth set and feel like it's my fault," says Jonah  
Chris Chesterman. It's not over yet, Chris.

Fifth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 2-2 Murray*: These are crucial 
moments, as the butterflies in my stomach are letting me know. Sure enough, 
Djokovic earns a break point, pinpoint ground strokes pulling Murray about all 
over the place - but Murray sends a rocket of a serve down the middle to rescue 
it. Djokovic has two more opportunites to break Murray, but if ever there was a 
time for Murray to start pounding down first serves, this is it. He holds. 
Just. "Another nice "Wire" quote Jacob, but if I dare be pretentious enough to 
stick in another and also stick my neck out on a result of this game, 'The King 
stay the King'," offers Kevin Comber.

Fifth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 3-2 Murray: Djokovic holds to love, 
wrapping up the game with a backhand down the line that you can only really 
stand back and applaud. Murray is making no inroads into his serve now. 
Djokovic is relentless when he's returning. There's only so much Murray can 
take before he cracks.

Fifth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 4-2 Murray*: There might not be a way 
back from this. Murray saves a break point at 30-40 - or rather, Djokovic 
misses a forehand pass at 30-40 - but it's not long before he's facing another. 
Once again, his inability to kill off a point comes back to haunt him. It was 
there to be won after Djokovic hung a defensive shot up, the ball just begging 
to be smashed away. But Murray let it drop, and once Djokovic was back in the 
point, a miscue from Murray gave him the chance to finish it off with a killer 
forehand.

Fifth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 5-2 Murray: Murray' gone. Djokovic 
holds to love and this gladitorial contest is not going to get the barnstorming 
ending it deserves. Djokovic is now a game away.

Fifth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 5-3 Murray*: He couldn't, could he? 
Murray holds and the crowd's rapturous reception to that tells you all you need 
to know. "As I said you can not switch off for a set and hope to turn it back 
on, but I'm hoping for the miracle of sport for him!" says Anthony O Connell. 
"Last 14 games he's only won three games and that tells its own story."

Fifth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 5-4 Murray: Serving for the match, 
Djokovic finds himself broken to love! Murray kept on fighting, dominating the 
first point with massive hitting to go 0-15 up. Suddenly Djokovic is feeling a 
little tight, and nervously sends a backhand into the net to make it 0-30. 
Murray then puts absolutely everything into a stupendous forehand, smashing it 
into the left corner to earn three break points! He seizes the moment, and when 
a volley from Djokovic falls into the middle of the court, he rams a forehand 
back past him. What more is this barmy match going to throw at us?

Fifth set: Djokovic 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 5-5 Murray*: Murray uses language of 
the industrial nature when, as he's waiting serve, someone chucks a ball on to 
the court. It seems to throw him a little, and he loses the first point, 
slicing a forehand into the net after a shot from Djokovic landed on the 
baseline. He thought it was out. But he wins the next three points though. What 
a competitor. The crowd loves him. They love him! This is never going to end, 
is it?

Fifth set: Djokovic* 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 6-5 Murray: The fans are completely 
with Murray now. And who could blame them? Djokovic loses the first point, 
hitting wide with a backhand and is then incredibly lucky not to go 0-30 down 
when a lob from Murray is called long. It was so tight, but neither player has 
any challenges left. Murray doesn't let it affect him though, and goes 15-30 up 
with a superb forehand winner. He's in the zone, and incredibly he finds 
himself with two break points when Djokovic weakly sends a backhand into the 
net. The first comes to nothing, a forehand into the net, and after a monstrous 
29-shot rally, Djokovic conjures a magical winner out of nowhere, an impossible 
forehand down the line. He's quite pleased with himself after that, but he's 
not out of the woods yet. Not at all, in fact, as he lazily sends a forehand 
long to give Murray a third break point, only for the Scot to hit the net with 
a backhand. Eventually Djokovic holds, winning the game with a forehand volley. 
This has the feel of Federer-Roddick in the Wimbledon final in 2009 about it.

Djokovic wins 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 7-5: You always felt it might end this way. 
The game slipped away from Murray when a questionable call went against him at 
15-all, but having used up all his challenges, he couldn't dispute it. A 
backhand into the net then gives Djokovic two match points, with the end in 
sight. He only needs one, opening up for a forehand from right to left that 
Murray somehow reaches and digs back over the net, only for Djokovic to place a 
forehand volley even out of his reach. Djokovic collapses. Djokovic collapses? 
How must Murray feel?

That was the best match since the Wimbledon final in 2008. Never again let it 
be said that Andy Murray is a choker. He pushed the world No1 all the way and 
no one could have complained if he'd won. He tried and he lost, but he's not a 
failure. After that gargantuan effort, they both deserve a medal; instead 
Murray is on the next plane home and Djokovic has a final with Rafael Nadal. 
Thanks for reading and emailing. Bye.
 