
It is often easy to be generous in victory but Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> certainly sounded sincere 
today when he said he believes it is only a matter of time before Andy Murray 
becomes a grand slam champion.

The two have spent a lot of time together over the past month, practising and 
catching up, and there was genuine warmth in their embrace at the net despite a 
6-4, 6-2, 6-3 defeat that was as one-sided as the scoreline suggests. Djokovic 
said he had played almost perfectly but before he celebrated his second grand 
slam title, he found time to give Murray backing.

"I understand how he feels; it's his third [grand slam] final and he didn't 
get the title, so it's a tough one," the world No3 said. "But I really have big 
respect for him and his game because I think he has everything it takes to 
become a grand slam champion. I'm sure that very soon he will be."

Darren Cahill, a leading coach and a commentator with ESPN, said the Scot 
might do well to watch the final again to see where he went wrong. "Murray 
needs to take a look at this match, maybe get a tape of it, to see how he fared 
emotionally, because he was flat. I think the big question mark is how well he 
takes this loss." His feelings were echoed by the former US Davis Cup captain 
Patrick McEnroe, who described Murray's performance as "listless" and said "he 
didn't show up mentally".

Djokovic said getting over the finishing line is the hardest thing to achieve. 
"Every time you get to [a grand slam final], you want to win it badly but some 
things go wrong. You're thinking too much, you're worrying too much in your 
head. It's a mental battle, definitely. The bottom line is that this is a very 
mental sport.

"Andy's a very talented player and he's a hard worker. He's been in the final 
three times and he just needs to make that final step. Of course, it's not 
easy. You could see his struggle and frustrations because he felt he had his 
chances to win. But it's a learning process.

"It wasn't easy for me, as well. I know how he feels. He's still young. I'm 
sure he's going to have more chances to win it."

Murray said he thought Djokovic's performance would have been too good for 
every player on the tour but did admit that it was frustrating to miss another 
chance. "Anyone who played in three finals would have loved to have won one, 
but I haven't," he said. "I just need to keep working hard to try to do it. But 
I would have preferred to have won one than lost three.

"I started to go for my shots more as the match went on. At the start both of 
us were trying to feel each other out a little bit and as you work your way 
into the match you start to find patterns and go for your shots more. I started 
taking more chances and managed to break serves a few times, but I wasn't able 
to keep it up for long enough."

The Scot received plenty of messages of support, especially from fellow 
British players, but his mother, Judy, who last year had to console a tearful 
Murray after his defeat by Roger Federer in the final, found the time to send a 
nice note via Twitter to Djokovic – "Well done Nole. So solid. Great ambassador 
for tennis".

Even though it was another chastening experience, Murray said he felt better 
than he did after losing to Federer 12 months ago. "It's better than it was 
last year. It is tough and disappointing but I have got to deal with it."

Djokovic has been riding a wave of confidence since last summer, when he 
turned round a faltering game to reach the final of the US Open, before going 
on to lead Serbia to their first Davis Cup title last month. The 23-year-old 
said that the win in Belgrade had been the key to his stunning form over the 
past fortnight.

"The Davis Cup win had a big role in my great performance here. After we won 
the title I was feeling great on the court, just eager to compete. And, of 
course, during this tournament I was feeling great on the court. The Davis Cup 
title and another grand slam title. I'm living the dream, definitely."
 