
There was a slew of broken serves, as in any worthwhile struggle, and one 
broken heart on Rod Laver Arena as the clock slipped way past midnight. As a 
year ago it again belonged toAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>. This time, though, it will be 
considerably easier to put back together.

In his longest ever match at 10 minutes short of five hours, and one of the 
truly stirring tennis fights – of thisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, this week or this era – 
Murray lost once more to the player who can fairly lay claim to being the best 
in the world, Novak Djokovic, who beat him so completely in the 2011 final.

It would be unfair – daft, even, and demeaning to the winner – to suggest 
Murray threw the match away after coming back from 2-5 in the fifth set and 
failing to convert any of three break points that would have left him serving 
for the match. This was tightrope tennis. Either man could have fallen off. 
Neither choked and the Serb deserved to hang on under the most intense pressure.

So the sceptics can park that prejudice out of the way. Murray left with his 
head held high. When Djokovic hit the winning forehand, neither had anything 
left to give. He won 6-3, 3-6, 6-7, 6-1, 7-5 in a semi-final that surpassed 
even the drama and excellence of the one on Thursday night, when Rafael Nadal 
beat Roger Federer. Djokovic, for the third straight major, plays Nadal in 
Sunday's final.

Murray was shattered. But he has much to take away from a defeat that was 
almost a victory. And, while it was difficult to detect emotion on the 
weathered face of his new coach, Ivan Lendl, the Czech was surely proud. Murray 
revealed later: "[Lendl] told me a couple of nights ago, 'You'll win but you're 
going to have to go through a lot of pain to get there, so prepare yourself 
mentally for that. There will be a lot of tough points to play when your legs 
are sore and your legs are burning.'"

He got the result wrong but the narrative right. Last January Djokovic won 
ruthlessly in three one-sided sets and so injured the Scot's spirit it was 
months before he recovered (although he sees it differently in hindsight). This 
was so much longer and bloodier – and that is why Murray should leave Melbourne 
with hope rather than disappointment alone.

After time to reflect he said: "Everyone sees this match or the tournament but 
there's so much more that goes into it: I've been away for two months. I 
prepared as well as I could, I played probably as well as I could and did all 
the right things – so I can't be disappointed."

Murray is growing as a player and a human being thrown into the bearpit his 
talent ensured would be his lot in life. If anything, he is better set to win a 
grand slam title because of this defeat than by reaching his three major 
finals. He played way above the levels of those encounters, for a start. He is 
a worthy contemporary of three of the finest players in tennis. His mission is 
still to beat one of them in the final of a major and there is no shirking the 
effort that will take.

Last year, after Djokovic wiped the court with him, he said he wanted to get 
away from tennis, his obsession since the age of 10, to walk the dog, get some 
other sort of life for awhile. "I might not play for three months," he said. He 
was back a few weeks later but it took months for him to find his game again.

On Friday night he was in calmer mood, despite aching limbs and bruised pride. 
"I've always liked being on the court, I never like just putting the rackets 
away for two and a half, three weeks. I always try to keep myself active in 
some way. I'll definitely take five, six days off and then start hitting again. 
Hopefully the body's OK but the last two months have been tough physically and 
I had some niggles, coming into the tournament so I need to get them better."

That is the talk Lendl will want to hear. A year ago, Murray was the boss. He 
is still paying the freight but his coach is more like a partner.

This was a match that dipped and soared. Murray struggled early and a blowout 
seemed possible; he recovered well in the second set as the level rose, 
out-toughed Djokovic in a competitive third, was blasted out in the fourth, 
which took a mere 25 minutes, and then they set themselves on drained legs for 
the fight in the fifth.

"Andy deserved the credit to come back after 2-5 down," Djokovic said. "He was 
really fighting. Not much words to describe the feeling I have now. It was a 
physical match. It was one of the best matches I played. Emotional and mentally 
it was difficult too. We were breaking each other's serve easier than holding. 
It was a very even match, from the first to the last point."

The highlights reel would be far longer than that of the lowlights. Djokovic 
hit 184 winners to 161 and Murray's error count was higher at 86 to 69 – but 
those are just numbers. Murray changed his shirt but not his gameplan in the 
deciding fifth. He tried to stretch Djokovic but his legs were sapped. It was 
the Serb, previously spent, who now pulled the strings.

There were two crucial games early in the set. The first was during Djokovic's 
serve at 1-1, a literally breathtaking 25-shot rally in which Murray ran 
Djokovic ragged to get to 30-30. The Serb held but he got the unmistakable 
message the fight was back on. The second was the next game, in which Murray's 
clutch ace saved the first of three break points and he drew level at 2-2. 
Djokovic held to love and, as they entered a new day, Murray emitted a scream 
when he went 30-40 down after cruising on his serve. Djokovic, though, blew a 
cross-court forehand for deuce – but not the forehand he drilled for a winner 
and break.

Murray hung on like a starving dog, winning a 26-shot rally (the average for 
the match was 6.2), then had Djokovic 0-30 on his serve with the prize in 
sight. A huge forehand clipped the baseline and the prime minister – booed 
earlier by the well-oiled punters – shook her head in disbelief. Nobody booed 
her now. They were entranced, especially when Murray came to the net to hit the 
winner.

They would have screamed the place down had he taken any of the three break 
points in the 10th game but Djokovic showed immense courage with high-risk 
shots to hold. Murray served to stay in the match but could not quite manage it.

Murray years ago settled on a quote from a thinker he had not heard of, the 
American journalist Herbert Bayard Swope, as his guiding philosophy: "I cannot 
give you the formula for success but I can give you the formula for failure – 
which is: try to please everybody." In one of his bravest defeats he left 
nobody displeased.
 