
The growing perception that Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> is in the vanguard of a new 
era in men's tennis was strengthened in a final of almost unbearable drama but 
there is one old soldier not prepared to put his rifle away just yet.

When Djokovic beat Rafael Nadal, who is still only 13 months older than him, 
for the seventh time in a row to keep hisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title, it was tempting to 
conclude that such domination might leave the Spaniard a desolate man, doomed 
to more nights of rollercoaster disappointment. He does not see it that way, 
and rightly so. His body aches; his spirit roars.

He admitted recently that Djokovic had got inside his head; in splendid defeat 
he has got that monkey off his back.

While Djokovic, on the statistical face of it, owns Nadal as Nadal has 
sometimes owned Roger Federer, there was little evidence in the closing acts of 
one of the best Australian Open finals ever that Rafa was Novak's bunny any 
more. And that is why Nadal leaves Melbourne happier than his wrecked on-court 
mien suggested after their record five hours and 53 minutes saga.

Where does Federer stand now? He has played some sublime tennis over the past 
six months but won the last of his 16 grand slam titles two years ago, here 
against Murray. He might come again. But where? Not in Paris. Probably not at 
Wimbledon. Maybe at Flushing Meadows. And will he be around after the Olympics? 
Maybe not.

Still there is no denying who the boss is now and for the immediate future. 
The world No1 should have a plus sign next to that ranking because he has again 
edged away from Nadal and Federer, as well asAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>, the world No4 whom he beat in a 
fantastic semi-final over five sets on Friday night.

Fittingly there were nearly as many stars in the stadium on Sunday night as in 
the skies above to witness a wonderful final: Margaret Court, Mark Edmondson 
(their last champion here), Frank Sedgman, Neale Fraser, Mervyn Rose, Bill 
Bowrey, Roy Emerson, Ken Rosewall and the greatest of them all, Rod Laver, a 
guest in his eponymous cathedral.

After a distracted performance in an arena that resembled a dentist's waiting 
room in the first set and the Colosseum in the fifth Djokovic beat Nadal 5-7, 
6-4, 6-2, 6-7, 7-5. It was as long as it was brutal as it was magnificent.

How good is Djokovic? After suspicions earlier in his career that he was 
quicker to quit or moan than fight he has become a formidable gladiator.

In their three defining clashes in majors last year Djokovic was too good for 
Nadal at Wimbledon, had a tougher time in New York but ultimately was stronger 
in the shot and here met a markedly rejuvenated foe.

Murray, too, can take heart from the fact that, while Nadal is hunting down 
Djokovic to the very limits of his physical, tactical and mental capacity in 
title deciders, he is a more serious threat than he was – significantly so 
compared with the dispiriting defeat here last year.

Murray got tantalisingly close to Djokovic on Friday night, as he did in Rome 
(his win over him in Cincinnati came via an injury retirement), and is 
encouraged in the belief that there is not a lot between them. Well, in one 
crucial respect there is: five grand slam titles. Until he wins one – in all 
likelihood by beating the man himself – Murray will have to look up the 
mountain rather than across the summit alongside his old friend. He is not far 
away but getting there has not become any easier.

What Murray can draw from Djokovic is the inspiration to get the last drop out 
of his talent. If that is good enough to win a grand slam title, he and a 
nation will be delighted. If it is not, so be it. Nobody has a right to victory 
– as Nadal would no doubt tell him.
 