
Andy Murray sent his old friend Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> on his way into the final of 
the 2012 Australian against Rafael Nadal on Sunday with a bit of Caledonian 
whimsy when he predicted: "He'll be tired, that's for sure."

After four hours and 50 minutes of unadulterated effort in a semi-final that 
stretched way past midnight on the Rod Laver Arena it was a singularly 
appropriate observation by the courageous loser. If the Serb beats the Spaniard 
in their third consecutive grand slam final, it will be despite rather than 
because of his five-set victory over Murray.

At points even before halfway Djokovic was gasping for breath, as he had been 
when beating David Ferrer in the quarter-finals on Wednesday, and looked "gone 
for all money", as they say here. Of course, he was not. The strength flooded 
back into his legs as the prospect of defeat drowned out tiredness and both men 
left the court drained but content that they had done their job. It will be no 
different on Sunday. This is their painful calling, one that pays handsomely 
but one to which they are nonetheless addicted, for good or bad, win or lose.

"There is no secret it is going to be physical again," Djokovic said. "I will 
do my best to recover. I have a day and a half. I will try to get as much sleep 
[as possible] and my recovery programme under way and hope for the best. That's 
going to be crucial, for me to recover and to be able to perform my best, 
because Rafa is fit. He's been playing well. He had an extra day. He definitely 
wants to win this title."

All of that might be stating the blindingly obvious but it is no less true for 
that. Nadal, who complained of a mysterious jabbing pain to his right knee 
early in the tournament, has played six matches with it strapped, yet shown no 
obvious discomfort, even in his firefight withRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> in the first semi-final.

That match revealed, too, the world No2's hunger after a 2011 campaign in 
which Djokovic beat him six times – all in finals, two of them in grand slam 
events. This will be their third straight showdown for a major title.

Djokovic was realistic about his task. "We all have different bodies that 
require more or less time to recover, so I can't really compare that to him. 
But I have been in similar situations, let's say, where I had the long matches 
and I'm supposed to play soon after. For example, a couple years back with 
Roger I had a very long match, and then the next day I was supposed to play 
finals. We are familiar with these kind of conditions and situations."

It is just this scenario that tipped the players into near revolt here, as 
they seek to rearrange schedules, workloads and the demands of two-week 
tournaments. It is not so bad here as the ridiculously back-ended US Open, 
where they played every day right up to the end of the concluding week.

Then Djokovic wore down Nadal in an excellent final after that outrageous win 
in the semi-finals over a devastated Federer.

His semi-final against Murray was, if anything, tougher, although Djokovic 
says, "I had a couple matches in New York against Roger in the last couple 
years which can be compared to this one. But time-wise, I think this was one of 
the longest, if not the longest, that I've played in the later stages of a 
grand slam.

"I have to be satisfied. I have to be happy. As a tennis player you practise 
hard every single day knowing that you will get an opportunity to be part of 
such a great match and on such a high level.

"I will try to get as much sleep as I can. I don't think I'll practise much. I 
had enough time on the court tonight."

Can he do it? Certainly. For all that the match hurt him physically, it surely 
has buoyed him mentally – and that, against Nadal, is nearly as important.

Three out of the past four years here the winner of the second semi-final has 
won the final, testimony at least to the considerable resilience of the modern 
athlete. If they can produce a final anywhere near the quality of the two 
matches that got them there, we are in for another memorable night.

Djokovic's brilliant year against Nadal


Novak Djokovic trails 16-13 in overall head to head games against Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> but in 2011 he won all six 
finals the pair contested. Here is how he did it.Research by Alistair Hendrie

US Open Final 13 September 2011

Djokovic wins 6-2 6-4 6-7 (3-7) 6-1

Djokovic launched an all-out attack on Nadal to secure his third grand slam 
title of 2011. Such was the ferocity of the Serb's shots that Nadal was often 
rocked back on the baseline, where he found it difficult to mount attacks of 
his own. Nadal's serve also let him down – he was broken 11 times by Djokovic 
during the match.

Wimbledon Final 3 July 2011

Djokovic wins 6-4, 6-1, 1-6, 6-3

Djokovic became the first Serb to win Wimbledon, inflicting Nadal's first 
defeat at the tournament in four years. It was an enthralling final but the 
quality of play often dipped and both players came close to losing a set to 
love. Djokovic worked Nadal over on his backhand, forcing the Spaniard wide to 
keep him away from his rasping forehand.

Rome Final 15 May 2011

Djokovic wins 6-4, 6-4

Djokovic stretched his unbeaten run to 39 but the toll of so many matches 
began to tell in the first set and the Serb looked fatigued. Luckily for him, 
errors crept into Nadal's game too and Djokovic became more fluent as he sensed 
his opponent's hesitancy.

Madrid Final 8 May 2011

Djokovic wins 7-5, 6-4

Djokovic described this absorbing victory as "unbelievable", and his 
enthusiasm was understandable considering this was Nadal's first loss on clay 
in two years. Seemingly feeling the pressure, Djokovic lost an imposing 5-3 
lead in the first set but managed to escape Nadal's clutches. He then ground 
out a brutal second set to beat his rival again.

Miami Final 3 April 2011

Djokovic wins 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4)

Djokovic struggled with windy conditions as he lost the opener to Nadal, who 
was at his brutal best. Djokovic decided to play more defensively as the match 
progressed and it proved successful as he worked Nadal round the court. Both 
men raised their levels in the third set. Nadal, however, stuttered in the 
tie-breaker. His early double-fault proved terminal to his hopes.

Indian Wells Final 20 March 2011

Djokovic wins 4-6, 6-3, 6-2

With this thrilling victory, Djokovic defeated Nadal in a final for the first 
time in six attempts. The match was filled with both exhilarating rallies and 
inexplicable miscues, yet Djokovic's serve grew stronger as the match 
progressed and he surged to victory after losing a tight first set.
 