
Q I work for local government and have a final salary pension, and I am buying 
extra years to the 15% income limit. After A-day, will I be able to have a Sipp 
as well, to take tax advantage of being able to put more than 15% into my 
pension? As I have few working years, I am anxious to top up my pension.
SL

A Yes, you can have a Sipp (Self-Invested Personal Pension) in addition to 
your final salary scheme. Under the new regime, anyone can contribute to any 
number of pension schemes as long as the total contributions do not exceed 100 
per cent of their annual earnings, up to a limit of £215,000.

This applies to personal pensions generally. A Sipp is only one option and may 
not be suitable in your case. All it does is offer much greater freedom of 
investment. You can choose your own investment, although things like 
residential property, fine wines and motor cars will be subject to a tax charge 
following a government u-turn on Sipps last year.

However, Sipps cost money, with a variety of different charges, including a 
set-up fee and ongoing investment advice. They are not normally recommended for 
sums of less than £100,000. There are a generation of cheaper Sipps available, 
but they often restricted to funds offered by the management company. If you 
are not a sophisticated investor it may be simpler, and cheaper, to plump for a 
normal personal pension policy with an insurance company.

I would opt for a stakeholder policy because it allows contributions to be 
varied and caps charges at a maximum of 1.5 per cent annually. Unfortunately, 
this means that there is a shortage of stakeholder pensions available and they 
usually offer only a limited range of funds. I suggest shopping around - you 
may prefer a non-stakeholder personal pension that offers greater investment 
choice, but which may have higher charges.

Meanwhile, flexibility is the order of the day under the new pension regime. 
There are only two basic restrictions - the maximum annual allowance mentioned 
above and the lifetime allowance, set at £1.5m in the first fiscal year.

Only those on very high salaries will be worried about the lifetime allowance 
for the present. Those in final salary schemes can multiply the annual pension 
to be received by 20 times to see whether they breach the lifetime allowance, 
plus adding any other pension funds they might have. You would have to have a 
pretty big pension from your final salary before you reach the lifetime 
allowance, which will rise to £1.8m over the next four years.

One of the biggest attractions of the new regime is that when you are over 50 
years old (rising to 55 in 2010), you will be able to take a tax-free lump sum 
without having to buy an annuity. Instead, you can leave the remainder of the 
pension fund invested and draw an income, up to a prescribed level, if you 
want. However, you will not be forced to draw any income and can simply leave 
the fund invested for capital growth over the years until you need the income.

Under new rules announced in the Budget, you will be allowed to re-invest up 
to 30 per cent of the tax-free lump sum into a new pension and receive tax 
relief on the contribution. Originally there was to be no restriction on the 
amount of the lump sum that could be reinvested, but it was realised that this 
could be a "licence to print money" especially for well-off investors 
qualifying for the top rate of tax relief. That is why a 20% (now increased to 
30%) restriction was proposed.

The new pension regime seems almost ideal for your circumstances. However, you 
should bear in mind that it will take some time, and money, to build up a 
worthwhile additional pension to your final salary scheme, although it will be 
an investment helped by tax relief at your highest rate.
 