
Ailing five-year-old Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> is once again with his 
parents, Naghmeh and Brett, while the health team at Southampton general 
hospital continues to be muzzled by confidentiality. Meanwhile, questions 
concerning mismanagement of the case by the police, the Spanish and the British 
courts, the hospital and the Crown Prosecution Service continue to grow. There 
has, however, been little exploration of whether a different, more conciliatory 
path, could have been pursued that avoided the Kings' flight, kept Ashya's best 
interests firmly at the forefront and held the media circus at bay.

A two-year pilot on conflict resolution and mediation at the Evelina London 
children's hospital that ends in 2015 might help to point the way. Unique in 
the UK, the Evelina Conflict Resolution Project  
<http://www.medicalmediation.org.uk/evelina-resolution-project/>is training 
around 1,000 staff to de-escalate conflict and improve communication with 
parents. In addition, there is a service offering advice to families, an 
improved system of dealing with complaints ("When a parent reads a letter from 
us, does it say, 'These people care about my child?'" says Helen Holloway, 
joint head of nursing), and mediation to find a path through an apparently 
intractable situation.

"A mediator is impartial," says Sarah Barclay, a former BBC journalist, 
founder of the not-for-profitMedical Mediation Foundation 
<http://www.medicalmediation.org.uk/>, heading the pilot, who also devised the 
training programme, based on interviews with staff and parents involved with 
conflict. "A trained mediator can't decide what is best, but he or she can make 
sure that everyone is heard and seek a resolution with as little collateral 
damage as possible."

During a morning in Evelina, a group of half a dozen nurses and sisters are 
taught the pathways to conflict, using a traffic lights scheme of green, amber 
and red. Green involves insensitive use of language (describing a child as 
"moribund", for instance); professionals giving conflicting messages and a lack 
of understanding of the circumstances of the whole family, including 
difficulties with other hospitals. "A mother may have three other children, no 
help and no money," says one nurse. "That adds pressure."

Amber is when staff and family begin to take sides; staff avoid contact with a 
"difficult" parent and families take notes and question the expertise of the 
staff in granular detail. By red, the child is no longer the focus and conflict 
takes on a life of its own.

The training advocates open questions. A mother expresses concern about a 
child's operation. "What's worrying you?" is preferable to "Oh, she'll be fine."

Mediation costs around £1,500 a case compared with court cases that leave 
taxpayers footing tens of thousands of pounds for the legal bills of theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

Victoria Butler-Cole, unpaid adviser to MMF, is the lawyer who acted as 
counsel for an NHS trust when the mother of seven-year-old Neon Roberts took 
the trust to court to challenge the need for her son's radiotherapy. "Courts 
would love more mediation," Butler-Cole says. "It's infinitely better than to 
go to court, where the judge sides with the health professionals nine times out 
of 10 and the situation is polarised still further."

Aspects of the King case are bound to be repeated with increasing regularity 
as parents push for cultural change in children's hospitals. The deference 
shown to doctors has diminished and many parents are amateur experts if they 
have access to the internet and are willing to go "doctor shopping". Hospital 
staff shortages and poor organisation also play a role, and medical decisions 
and a family's wishes are inevitably freighted with ethical dilemmas.

"What counts more: to live a little longer and suffer a great deal, or quality 
of life?" asks Dr Simon Meller, former director of the Children's Cancer Unit 
at the Royal Marsden hospital in London and a director of MMF. "It is a 
situation that's impossible for parents to solve on their own. What's so much 
better is a mutually agreed solution with a child, not the parents, always at 
the centre."

In three months this year, there were 68 instances of conflict at the Evelina 
– "the tip of the iceberg", says junior doctor Charlotte Sayer, research 
assistant on the pilot. The conflicts included communication breakdown (33), 
disagreement about treatment (23), unrealistic expectations (16), and families 
attempting to micro-manage (13).

Conflict absorbed 241.25 hours of staff time. In a survey of staff that had 
completed the pilot's training, 86% reported it had helped them to recognise 
the triggers of conflict and de-escalate it. Conflict affects families but it 
also results in staff sickness, work disruption, less time for other patients 
and divided health teams.

"A lot of staff assume conflict is just part of the culture," says Sayer. "In 
medical training we are taught about communication, but not about actively 
listening to what parents say."

In 2011, Henrietta and Andy Bonugli spent five unhappy months at Evelina with 
Isidora, now 15, known as Isi. She has Rett syndrome, a rare genetic illness 
that mostly affects girls. Symptoms include problems with breathing, walking 
and seizures. Stays at other hospitals had not been positive. "Isi doesn't have 
a voice, but that doesn't mean she can't communicate," Henrietta, 44, says.

"We could so easily have been the King family. At Evelina, I requested at 
least twice a day that Isi was moved to another hospital. I told the sister 
that I intended to take Isi – she said that if I did the police would be 
called."

Among the incidents, a tube feed was increased rapidly against Henrietta's 
wishes, causing severe vomiting. Isi's medical records say this was a 
"misjudgment". The medical team were "very sorry" and agreed the feeds should 
have been increased more gradually.

The differences between clinical judgment and Henrietta's knowledge of her 
daughter meant trust broke down. The couple recorded 36 hours of conversations 
with consultants because, they said, they received conflicting information on a 
daily basis and needed correct information to seek help from a US 
gastroenterologist.

Isi was eventually rushed to paediatric intensive care with respiratory 
failure. "In the ward we weren't consulted or listened to,"Henrietta says. "In 
the unit we finally felt safe. The consultants discussed it with us and 
together we found a way to improve Isi's health."

For the past three years, Isi has been successfully cared for at home in Kent, 
requiring tube feeding every half hour, by her dedicated parents and a 
multidisciplinary team. "Some doctors have a tendency to look at the condition 
but not at the child," Henrietta says. "That doesn't help."

One paediatrician involved in Isi's case was Dr Esse Menson, who was so 
concerned by the breakdown in communication that she called on the help of 
Sarah Barclay. Subsequently, they established the Evelina Conflict Resolution 
Project. "When your own children are ill, you realise how disempowering it can 
be," Menson says. "In paediatrics, conflict is less about shouting or violence, 
it's as if the staff and parents are talking two different languages, so 
nothing moves forward. If a child recovers but the family remain angry and 
upset, that's not success."

Alex Phillips is matron on the Neonatal Intensive Care unit staffed by 150 
nurses. Twenty years ago, she says, the survival rate for babies born at 24 
weeks was very low; now many more survive but often with extreme complications. 
Barclay helped to mediate with the team when a parent was divisive and refused 
mediation herself. "It's voluntary," she points out. "Not a punishment."

Phillips is a mediation convert. "In the past we operated in first gear, now 
we're constantly in fifth. It's crazy. It's easier to run into the drugs 
cupboard and avoid a challenging parent instead of talking – yet talking is 
what's missed."

Dr Hilary Cass, president of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health 
and a consultant in paediatric disability at the Evelina, says: "Sometimes it's 
difficult for families and clinicians to reach a shared view … where it does 
escalate it's not good for anyone, particularly the child who is stuck in the 
middle. Based on the success of this pilot, we hope to see similar schemes 
rolled out in hospitals across the country."

Isi's mother has no doubts. "Sarah was brilliant," Henrietta says. "Mediation 
was brought in too late for us, but I saw it as such a positive intervention. I 
am 100% behind it if it can save families from the grief that we went through."
 