
Actor Philip Glenister, anti-hero DCI Gene Hunt in BBC1's Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes>, is to take on a 
rather different guise for his next project, playing a vampire hunter in a 
modern day take on the Dracula story.

Glenister, who also starred in Life on Mars, is to play Rupert Galvin, a 
"larger-than-life" American with a "tragic past and a zero-tolerance policy to 
the rabble of mythical half-life entities" in the as yet untitled new ITV1 
drama series.

The drama, currently known internally at ITV as the "untitled Van Helsing 
project", will put a "contemporary spin on the legacy of Bram Stoker's Dracula" 
and be set above and beneath the streets of modern-day London.

Glenister's character will appear in the life of his teenage godson, Luke, 
played by Robin Hood's Christian Cooke.

Luke's father died in mysterious circumstances and afterwards Glenister's 
Galvin is "catapulted into a world of vampires, demons and zombies".

The Office's Mackenzie Crook will also appear as the evil Gladiolus Thrip, a 
sinister vampire with a burning hatred for the Van Helsing lineage.

"There are supernatural forces of evil at work and it is Luke's destiny, as 
the last descendent of the Van Helsing line, to smite the half-lives that stalk 
our streets," ITV said.

The drama will be made by Elisabeth Murdoch's independent production company, 
Shine, which previously made Sky One's supernatural series Hex.

It will be produced by the team behind Hex - Julian Murphy and Johnny Capps - 
and written by two writers from that show, Peter Tabern and Lucy Watkins, as 
well as Hotel Babylon's Howard Overman.

The six-part drama was commissioned by ITV director of drama Laura Mackie. It 
is currently filming in London with an ITV1 transmission expected later in the 
year.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 