
Ali Dizaei is taking his porridge at Her ­Majesty's Pleasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/09/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-police>
, after being convicted of trying to frame an ­innocent man and ­lying to cover 
up his abuse of ­office. Dizaei's crime was made worse by his position as a 
commander with the ­Metropolitan Police Service. And as leader of the National 
Black Police ­Association, where for years he hasloudly demanded that the 
police get to grips with institutional racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/23/lawrence-race1>, there 
is a long queue of his former colleagues and ­detractors ready to bury him 
under a huge pile of abuse.

Brian Paddick, a former Met deputy commissioner, told Radio 4's Today 
programme that previous disciplinary actions against Dizaeihad been dropped for 
"politically driven" reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/09/ali-dizaei-disciplinary-charges-police>
. "My understanding is that it might have been the case that some of those 
disciplinary charges against him could have been proven," Paddick said.

As the self-appointed terminator of institutional racism and incompetence in 
the Met, Dizaei did not care who got in his way. His actions and style made 
many enemies and created fear among many, even his managers. But what is now 
worrying, as that chapter comes to a close, is the prospect of the Met 
­believing they can put on the back burner the quest to root out sexism and 
racism. Already, some voices are ­urging an end to strident anti-racism efforts.

For the Met to heed such calls would be a disaster. As statistics for 
grievances and disciplinary cases highlighted by the NBPA show, ethnic minority 
­officers are still more likely to be ­disciplined than their white colleagues. 
I am ­flabbergasted to hear ofthe alleged professional shortcomings of Ali 
Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/08/case-against-commander-ali-dizaei>, 
and ask myself why the Met did not deal with his transgressions through their 
own internal disciplinary processes?

As someone who worked with the Met on several occasions over the last 20 
years, I found there a fear of ­getting things wrong, rather than ­confidence 
in taking action and ­justifying ­decisions. Managers tended to leave sensitive 
­decisions to others for fear of being labelled a racist. This, in tackling 
­institutional discrimination, was the biggest flaw in many organisations I 
worked with – though the Met ­during my review did vigorously seek to address 
these deficiencies.

One of my main criticisms of the Met has always been its failure to deal with 
staff shortcomings and grievances quickly and informally – whatever the 
officers' ethnicity – before it became formal and intractable. That serious 
management fault line has apparently still not been remedied.

It is not a personal criticism of the Met's police officers to state that 
­institutional racism is still there to be tackled. But the force did not like 
uppity blacks who were assertive and ­challenging. Come to think of it, no 
organisation welcomes such challenges. They like the comfort zone, where 
­compliant black and Asian staff do not seek to rock the boat. If there were 
not assertive and challenging staff, little or no progress would ever be 
achieved.

In the Met, no amount of timid black and Asian officers, even in ­prominent 
positions, will change anything if we continue to observe the same level of 
disproportionality in stop and search, grievances and disciplines, as they 
impact black and minority ethnic citizens and staff. Nor should we go on 
accepting the huge level of ­compensation paid out in race and sex 
discrimination cases against the police over the last decade. And we do not 
want to see any corruption, abuse, incompetent and inappropriate conduct by any 
officer in the Met.

The change to acknowledging ­racism in the Met – and ­tackling it – came on 
the back of confrontation, ­sacrifice and ­conflict. The 1999 ­Macpherson 
report into Stephen ­Lawrence's death was the ­catalyst. The initial Met 
response was one of shock and denial, but ­incoming ­commissioner Sir John 
­Stevens took a dynamic and ­positive lead – not to ­provide privileges for 
ethnic ­minorities but to make the system ­better, so ­everyone could benefit 
from an efficient public police service, irrespective of race, sex, class or 
other circumstances.

The Met's leadership has been pivotal in steering many positive changes. Now 
is not the time to backtrack. No one wants anotherAli Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, but if the Met does not lead the 
required changes with assertiveness, determination and total commitment, that 
is what we will get.
 