
The number of scientific experiments using animals continued to increase last 
year despite the coalition's commitment to work to reduce their use,official 
figures show 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/statistics-of-scientific-procedures-on-living-animals-great-britain-2013>
.

There were 4.12m scientific procedures using animals in Great Britain in 2013, 
a rise of 0.3% on the previous year, according to Home Office statistics, 
following an upward trend that has seen the number increase by 1.41m since 1995.

Animal welfare groups criticised the figures but the head of the Home Office's 
Animals in Science Regulation Unit (Asru) insisted progress was being made 
towardsthe coalition's 2010 commitment 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-to-reduce-the-use-of-animals-in-research-delivery-plan>
.

"There are enormous efforts going on to not using animals where it's 
unnecessary for them to be used," said Dr Judy MacArthur Clark. "Where these 
animals are being used, then there's a necessity for that use. There's a lot of 
effort going into replacement."

She said the figures did not show the number of experiments using animals that 
had been avoided because of work to reduce animal use. Under the law scientists 
are required to consider the 3Rs: to replace the use of animals; reduce the 
number need; or refine procedures to cause less suffering.

In only one year (2009) since 2001 has the number of experiments on animals 
fallen on the previous 12 months. The lastest increase has been driven by a 
rise in the number of procedures undertaken to breed genetically modified 
animals (GM) and animals with a harmful genetic mutation (HM), which, in total, 
rose 6% to 2.1m last year and has risen by 573% since 1995. By contrast, the 
number of experiments for other purposes fell 5% to 2.02m last year, its lowest 
level in two decades.
 Animal Testing Chart WEB 110714 
The Home Office said that "while many types of research have declined or even 
ended, the advent of modern scientific techniques has opened up new research 
areas, with genetically modified animals, mainly mice, often being required to 
support those areas".

Prof Roger Morris, former academic manager of King's College London's 
experimental animal facility, said that modified animals were needed for 
modelling the early stages of complex diseases such as cancer, Parkinson's 
disease and dementia, more accurately than before.

After breeding to produce GM or HM animals, the most common purposes for 
experiments were fundamental biological research and research into the 
development of and quality control of drugs or devices.

The ASRU found 33 issues of noncompliance last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/animals-in-science-regulation-unit-annual-report-2013>
, including the death of 1,000 rats and mice at an unnamed breeding 
establishment. MacArthur Clark said that while such incidents should be 
avoided, they must be seen in the context of the total number of animals used.

Michelle Thew, chief executive of the British Union for the Abolition of 
Vivisection <http://www.buav.org/>, said: "The government has now failed for a 
third year on its 2010 post-election pledge to work to reduce the number of 
animals used in research and, as a result, millions of animals continue to 
suffer and die in our laboratories."

Peta <http://www.peta.org.uk/> described GM experiments as "imprecise, 
inefficient and unreliable 'Frankenstein science'".
 