
A growing number of adults in England do not have the number skills required 
to work out their change in a supermarket, a government study has found.

Researchers commissioned by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
gave tests in basic numeracy and literacy to more than 7,200 adults.

The results showed that 24% had the number skills of a child aged nine or 
younger 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/further-education-skills/docs/0-9/11-1367-2011-skills-for-life-survey-findings.pdf>
. This means they would struggle to count up to 1,000 and may find it difficult 
to work out how many cars are needed to take a large group of friends home.

In 2003, when researchers administered the same tests to a similar sample 
size, 21% of adults had the number skills of a child aged nine or younger.

A charity that promotes adult learning – the National Institute of Adult 
Continuing Education (Niace) – described the finding as alarming and said part 
of the problem was that too many adults were taught by unqualified teachers.

It said those who hadn't mastered basic number skills struggled in life even 
more than those who hadn't acquired basic literacy skills.

The study also found that 15% of adults had the reading and writing age of a 
child aged 11 or younger. This means they would struggle to write a short email 
to a colleague using the correct spelling and punctuation. In 2003, 16% of 
adults had the reading and writing age of an 11-year-old.

Sue Southwood, programme manager at Niace, said the majority of adults who had 
not acquired basic literacy or numeracy skills did not have learning 
difficulties, but were "ordinary people who had had a negative experience of 
education".

"We desperately need to attract them back into adult learning because they 
will be trapped in unemployment or low-paid jobs," she said.

The researchers found the proportion of adults who had the equivalent of an A* 
to C grade at GCSE in English had risen since 2003. Some 57% of the adults 
achieved this, compared to 44% in 2003.

The government has promised to boost the study of English and maths for adults 
and has said that in future employers that take on apprentices will be required 
to offer training in English and maths up to the standard of a GCSE pass.

A full report on the study – called Skills for Life – will be published in the 
spring.
 