
The president of the National Union of Students, Aaron Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, is to stand down this 
summer amid fierce criticism that he did not fight hard enough to prevent 
university tuition fees almost trebling.

The decision follows claims that the union's leadership had lost touch with a 
growing number of students determined to make their voices heard from the 
streets. The 26-year-old and his supporters were, it is said by some in the 
febrile world of student politics, slow to recognise the depth of anger among 
grassroots activists over fees.

Following clashes between police and students on the evening of 9 December, 
just after MPs had voted to raise fees to a maximum of £9,000 a year Porter 
appeared on television to condemn the violence.

Stephen Brown, national secretary of the NUS until 2008, said the speed with 
which Porter had denounced the violence had marked a "clear tipping point" when 
his support started to dwindle. "He was absolutely right to condemn violence, 
but some of his members were out demonstrating peacefully while he was 
condemning it. It would have been better to wait a little longer."

Others have attacked Porter for being too slow to endorse students' 
occupations of university buildings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/11/nus-porter-failed-student-protestors>
 and said he had "admitted defeat before the battle over tuition fees had 
started".

Mark Bergfeld, spokesman for the Education Activist Network, which has 
organised many of the fees demonstrations, said Porter had seen himself more as 
a policymaker than an activist defending his members on the streets.

"Students have had enough of a leader who talked about the graduate tax while 
they were planning marches to call for free education," said Bergfeld, a member 
of the Socialist Workers party who is to be a candidate for the presidency.

However, Porter is credited by many with leading a high-profile campaign 
against higher fees and education cuts over the last year.

He helped organise a march in London in November that was attended by 52,000 
protesters and was instrumental in getting Liberal Democrat MPs to sign a 
pledge that they would vote against an increase in tuition fees – a move that 
came to haunt the party when legislation was passed in December allowing the 
rise.

But, despite having said on several occasions that he would stand for 
re-election this summer, he has decided to step down when his first term of 
office ends in June.

Wes Streeting, a former NUS president, and other students said Porter had 
faced personal abuse and had been bullied by anarchist and radical student 
groups who have been angry that Porter has not taken a harder stance against 
fees and cuts.

Streeting, who was NUS president between 2008 and last year, said Porter's 
opponents had been "extreme, random anarchists". They had failed to distinguish 
between the personal and the political, subjected Porter to vicious personal 
comments and thrown eggs and trifles at him.

"Student politics can be a bit like this, but Aaron has had to take more of 
this than most because he has been at the cutting edge of the biggest political 
debate for students in a long time. I applaud his courage because it might have 
been easier to dig his heels in and stay on."

Last month, Porter was due to speak at a rally in Manchester, but had to be 
escorted away when protesters hurled abuse at him. He said they had tried to 
intimidate him.

Stephen Brown said Porter would have been working in an "incredibly bullying 
environment" in which at least 15 separate factions within the union pulled in 
different ways.

Porter denied he had been hounded out and said he was stepping aside because 
the NUS needed a "fresh outlook" as universities and students entered a new 
environment of higher tuition fees and reduced public funds.

He said the NUS response to education cuts "will go down in the history 
books", adding: "We've kick-started a wave of student action, brought the 
coalition to its knees and shaped the public debate on education in an 
unprecedented fashion." He said the government's decision to raise tuition fees 
would mean thousands of students "will now decide that higher education is not 
for them. The ones that do get to go will be plunged into an era of market 
chaos".

At least three candidates have put themselves forward as the next president. 
Apart from Bergfeld, they include Liam Burns, president of NUS Scotland and 
Shane Chowen, NUS vice-president.Bergfeld said the NUS needed a new leader who 
"does not dither in the face of the huge attacks on students in terms of 
massive hikes in tuition fees, youth unemployment and police violence at 
protests." But Porter warned that the NUS "could not allow itself to be 
hijacked by the Socialist Workers Party".

Streeting said those students who "wanted the NUS to be a front for the 
Socialist Workers Party will be sorely disappointed".

Porter, who is a member of the Labour party, said he would be looking for a 
job in a campaigning organisation or the education sector. He said he would not 
rule out working in politics at a later stage.

• This article was amended on 22 February 2011. The original heading read: NUS 
leader to quit amid recriminations over student tuition fees. For the avoidance 
of misunderstanding, this has been changed to conform with the headline wording 
that appeared in the newspaper.
 