
A staunch opponent of higher university tuition fees was voted president of 
the National Union ofStudents <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> 
today, setting the next government on a likely collision course with students.

Aaron Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, who won 444 
votes out of 678, vowed to organise a national demonstration before any vote in 
parliament over a fee rise and promised to name and shame MPs who supported an 
increase.

Porter, 25, stood as an independent, but is a member of the Labour party and 
said he would fight against Labour if it accepted the review's recommendations 
of a hike.

An independent review is looking into whether ministers should raise fees, 
currently at £3,225 a year. The review, led by the former BP chief executive 
Lord Browne, will report to the next government shortly after the general 
election and is expected to propose that fees should be increased.

Both Labour and the Conservatives have said they will not make clear their 
position on fees until after the review is published. The Liberal Democrats 
have promised to phase out all tuition fees over six years. Porter, a graduate 
of Leicester University, has held the post of vice-president (higher education) 
of the union for two years.Speaking to the Guardian at the NUS annual 
conference in Gateshead, he said he "fundamentally opposed any rise in tuition 
fees" and would campaign for better access to universities for the poorest and 
most under-privileged. "I am committed to wider access to university based on 
ability," he said.

But his stance against higher tuition fees could set him against ministers and 
university heads, some of whom want to lift the current cap on tuition fees to 
meet the rising costs of providing higher education.

Vice-chancellors have suggested annual fees of £5,000 or more and some would 
like to set their own tariff, creating a market.

But Porter argues this would lead to only the richest students being able to 
choose where to study, and the most prestigious universities becoming too 
expensive for the poor.

He has promoted the idea of a graduate tax to replace tuition fees, rather 
than a policy of free higher education.

His victory shows the majority of students accept that they must pay, at some 
stage, for higher education. Under the graduate tax model, suggested by the NUS 
in June, graduates would contribute to a national trust between 0.3% and 2.5% 
of their salaries each month, over 20 years. The contributions would depend on 
a graduate's salary. A graduate on £40,000 would pay £125 a month, while 
someone on £16,000 would pay £5.

Porter said: "If Browne recommends a rise, we would lobby the government to 
stop it. The worst scenario would be for the cap to be lifted to a place where 
there is a market, where different institutions charge different fees. That 
would alter the choice of course students make. This is a time to continue 
pressurising politicians not to increase the cap on fees. Students, families 
and the wider public overwhelmingly oppose higher fees and I will fight to 
ensure that politicians listen to them."

Porter has pledged to found a coalition with trade unions in the education 
sector to identify collective action and lobby for the Education Maintenance 
Allowance and the Adult Learning Grant, which help the poorest students to 
return to or continue in education. 

He said the scale of the challenges ahead were an "added motivation" to stand 
as president.

Research suggests the majority of students have not been deterred from 
applying to university by tuition fees, but the NUS warns that future rises 
would discourage young people from entering higher education.

Aaron will succeed the current NUS president, Wes Streeting, in June for an 
initial 12-month term. He defeated NUS black students' officer, Bell 
Ribeiro-Addy, who received 182 votes, and Chris Marks, vice-president 
(education) of Hull University students' union, who gained 24.

Previous presidents include justice secretary Jack Straw, former home 
secretary Charles Clarke and former MP and Labour-Cooperative candidate Stephen 
Twigg.

The NUS delegates also passed a motion to support strikes and occupations over 
cuts. "Strikes and occupations against cuts are no longer merely something we 
see in Greece or France, they are happening here. These tactics have an 
important place in our movement," the motion states.

More than 116,000 students are thought likely to miss out on a university 
place this autumn because of record applications. The Universities and Colleges 
Admissions Service (Ucas) said there was a 16.5% rise in applications for this 
year, which means more than 610,000 students could be competing for 494,000 
places.
 