
Three minutes after slipping out on to the soft waters of Loch Eishort, I 
found myself paddling behind the sinuous form of an otter. I've encountered 
otters before on Skye, but never like this, puttering along gently just yards 
in its wake. "Neither fish nor beast is the otter," Ted Hughes wrote, but there 
is no creature like it for making sense of water.

Nor is there a boat quite like the sea kayak for doing the same. The Inuit 
built kayaks as an elegant technological solution that allowed them to colonise 
the hostile High Arctic. They hunted seals, walruses, birds and even otters 
from these low, slender craft that were, like a bespoke suit, constructed for 
the individual who would paddle it.

Squeezing my capacious, non-Inuit backside into the narrow cockpit at the 
start of my first day required instructor and guide Gordon Brown to keep the 
kayak steady. But once in, I nudged myself backwards until I had room to turn 
the boat around. On calm water these boats feel stable and with a little 
practice easy to manoeuvre.

Right in front of me, strung out against the blue sky, were the black summits 
of the Cuillins, Britain's most dramatic mountain range. The sea loch was calm, 
the water transparent. I could see starfish on the seabed 20ft below me, and a 
crab sliding across rocks. In the distance was a white shell beach on which to 
land. "Horrible, isn't it?" Gordon said with a smile, gesturing at the 
ridgeline in front of us.

"Ghastly," I agreed, drifting into a state of inner peace to match the 
dazzling view and warm sunshine. Yet the surface of a Scottish sea loch, even 
on a nice day, is never still. Tide and breeze suck and ruffle the water. And 
then there are the creatures. There was the otter, of course, and common seals 
- which are far from common - a few shelduck and the deranged call of a diver. 
We also had a laugh at two pairs of eider ducks, a bird whose collective noun 
ought to be a Frankie Howerd, from the camp cackle they make.

Gordon gathered his excited little flock of novices and shepherded us along 
the southern shore of Loch Eishort, performing that most delicate trick good 
instructors have of allowing students to teach themselves. A former car 
mechanic whose weekends and summer evenings were spent on the water, Brown set 
up his guiding business a few years ago with wife Morag, a former GP and 
specialist in wilderness medicine.

Sea kayaking used to be a fringe activity practised by a few devotees. Even 
just 10 years ago, Brown recalls that if he saw a kayak on the roof of a car at 
a motorway service station he generally knew not just whose it was but where 
they were going.

Now, the numbers are growing fast, fuelled by new guidebooks, new guiding 
services and the realisation that sea kayaking is a bit like hill walking on 
the sea - a great way to explore and experience nature. A kayak and accessories 
cost £2,000, pricey enough but small change judged against the price of a 
yacht. You don't have to be committed to the sport to get a great deal out of 
it. But if you're prepared to learn the skills, a kayak can carry food and 
camping gear for longer journeys.

The Inuit used driftwood washed north from the forests of Siberia and northern 
Canada for timber to build kayak frames, cut with stone tools. Around four seal 
pelts were sewn together with sinew and oiled.

The Inuit would stretch their sealskin jackets over the kayak's opening, 
creating a largely watertight seal. A modern kayak is made from composites or 
plastic and has hatches and bulkheads for safety, and your spray-deck isn't 
made of sealskin. It's also a lot safer than the Inuit experience of hunting 
among icebergs.

Just before we turned to paddle north across Loch Eishort towards the looming 
mass of the Cuillins, Gordon points out the ruins of Dun Sgathaich, perched on 
a rocky island near the village of Tokavaig. From the water, it was a wildly 
romantic sight. The Celtic legend surrounding the place tells of the warrior 
woman Scáthach, who taught the Ulster Cycle hero Cúchulainn all he knew of the 
arts of war and gave him his famous spear, Gaé Bulg. She also granted him the 
"friendship of her thighs", as a reward for working hard in training. He in 
turn not only had an affair with Scáthach's daughter Uathach, but also slept 
with her arch enemy, producing a son he later killed in battle. Those Celts, eh?

North-west Scotland might be regarded by south-east England as a beautiful 
backwater, but the region was an intellectual powerhouse which helped spread 
Christianity from communities like Iona, and as a trading region, too. For 
centuries, Skye was functionally independent of English or Scottish kings, 
ruled instead by Triath nan Eilean, the Lord of the Isles, a Gaelic-Norse 
lineage that controlled the western seaboard from the Outer Hebrides to the 
Isle of Man. Being on the water like this puts you in touch with a lot of 
half-forgotten history. Turning for home, we could see a group of common seals 
and a couple of greys basking on a rock. They bounced themselves off their 
perches and into the water. Stories about selkies, creatures that are seals in 
water and humans on dry land, still persist. The men, they say, are very 
handsome and persuasive, especially to women whose husbands have been long at 
sea.

Gordon tells me about a theory that selkies were Inuits in their sealskins, 
taken by whalers in the Arctic with their kayaks and abandoned as they 
approached Europe to avoid awkward questions. The selkie legend does seem to 
originate on Orkney, a staging post for whaling ships. A moment later, one of 
the grey seals stuck its glossy head out of the water 25ft off the bow of my 
kayak and regarded me with its black eyes. Then it turned beneath the surface. 
I glanced down and saw its mottled shape swim under my boat and disappear into 
the shadows.

· Skyak Adventures (01471 833428, skyakadventures.com 
<http://www.skyakadventures.com>) offers guided kayaking including boat hire 
for around £80pp per day, with a maximum of six per guide. For accommodation 
and more information on adventure sports in Scotland, see
isitscotland.com/adventure <http://www.visitscotland.com/adventure>.
 