
For a medic on deployment overseas, on-duty shifts may be dangerously fraught, 
but there's not an awful lot to do on base in the long stretches of downtime 
between bursts of frenzied activity.

Recognising that service personnel were finding it hard to fill their off-duty 
periods, the RAF recently teamed up withAnglia Ruskin University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/angliaruskinuniversity> to give its 
medics a chance to use those empty hours to stretch their brains and improve 
their qualifications.

As of this September, medical personnel have been able to study on three 
degree-level courses from wherever they are in the world. Prospective students 
can opt for a BSc in health and social care, a BSc in management and leadership 
in health and social care, or a foundation degree course – and every lecture, 
seminar and tutorial is delivered entirely online.

Doing a standard course on a part-time basis can be tricky for service 
personnel on active duty, explains flight sergeant Chris MacKay, who worked 
with Anglia Ruskin to get the first 21 RAF medics enrolled. Even "blended" 
degrees that are delivered mainly online tend to require intensive workshop 
sessions and tutorials at certain points in the learning process.

For an RAF medic this is not a practical way to gain a qualification. You 
might plan to complete a couple of modules of a course that includes contact 
time with your tutor or fellow students, says MacKay, but then be sent overseas 
at short notice: repeatedly missing out on group study sessions or face-to-face 
tutorials clearly doesn't help any student's morale or ability to study 
productively.

"The problem we have is that predicting where we'll be in 12 months' time is 
difficult – we could be in Scotland, the Falklands or Afghanistan," he says. 
None of the students who've just enrolled are currently deployed overseas, but 
they're only a month into their course and can be sent abroad at any time if 
the need arises.

Encouraging continuity of study may be a positive step, but is doing a degree 
over the internet really as good as having proper contact time with subject 
experts and fellow students who share your interests? At Anglia Ruskin 
University, Tony Howard, head of the employer- liaison department Higher Skills 
At Work, who persuaded the RAF of the merits of this approach, says that it can 
be.

"The virtual learning environment simulates a classroom and you can network 
with others doing the same course," he says. "Most of what's available on 
campus is available online."

A degree that has been designed for every element to be delivered via a web 
portal, he points out, means that students can be very well supported by 
specialist tutors whose time is dedicated to offering online or telephone 
advice and guidance. They are recruited specifically to work with students on 
these courses and are available virtually around the clock.

Providing staff with the chance to do an online degree isn't just about 
helping them to pass their off-duty time when on deployment. The services are 
facing swingeing redundancies, so helping staff to gain qualifications that 
will be recognised when they leave the RAF is becoming more of a priority. It's 
certainly one of the factors motivating medics to sign up.

Isabel Stone, 39, who works as deputy medical practice manager at RAF 
Leuchars, St Andrews, says that with the uncertainty surrounding the armed 
forces because of the Strategic Defence and Security Review, "it is encouraging 
that the RAF are actively investing in and encouraging medical service 
personnel with valuable learning opportunities such as this degree." Meanwhile, 
until redundancies start to bite, the RAF will benefit, too. Part of the idea 
of offering these particular courses, says MacKay, is "to develop what we're 
doing, to look at Civvy Street practice, and bring that into military practice".

Learning at a distance has considerable plus points, but there are downsides 
too, as students who have just embarked on their course explain.

Victoria Butler, 31, an instructor for the RAF's trainee medics and one of the 
first cohort to enrol, says the advantages for her include being able to study 
"at my own pace in my free time, giving flexibility and autonomy in my 
studies", but adds that she senses "it would be possible to feel quite alone if 
you have any real problems with the IT or subject matter".

Having himself just started the BSc in management and leadership in health and 
social care, MacKay says that being able to fit his studies around his family 
life is another major advantage, but observes, too, that considerable 
self-motivation is essential when there is absolutely no face-to-face contact 
time during the entire period of study.

Given that self-discipline is a quality that can hopefully be taken as read 
within the armed forces, it may be that interruptions to an online study 
session may come from less easily disciplined sources.

"I will be studying mainly at home, which at times can be distracting, 
especially when my three-year-old son wants my attention," says Stone.

"This said, my line management have been extremely helpful and understanding, 
and I have been given study time within my working day."
 