
The former army officer who was in charge of an apprentice school when 
15-year-oldchildren were horrifically abused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/23/man-worked-with-army-abusers-decades-after-horrific-apprentice-ritual>
 says he never knew it was happening.

Alan McDonald was the commanding officer at Balcombe, an army apprentice 
school on the Mornington Peninsula near Melbourne, from December 1972 to 
January 1976. On Friday he told the child abuse royal commission he still 
thought the abuse was not widespread.

Asked by the commission chairman, Peter McClellan, if just one incident of the 
brutal abuse being reported by witnesses was not one too many, he replied: 
“That’s life, I am afraid.”

McDonald said he was shocked and saddened by the stories he had heard at the 
commission.

“I was really saddened to hear the stories that we heard,” he said. “I’m sure 
all the people here are shocked at what they heard.”

Man worked with his army abusers for decades after horrific apprentice ritual
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/23/man-worked-with-army-abusers-decades-after-horrific-apprentice-ritual>
McClellan asked if, as officer-in-charge, he should have known.

“Everyone has an opinion on that,” he replied, pointing out the abuse was not 
reported by the boys. “I mean one of them went to the hospital and said he was 
injured when he fell over a fence.”

McDonald said that if he had known, the offenders would have been discharged 
immediately because the army did not want people like that.

He said he was trained at Duntroon in 1948 and was aware of hazing and 
initiation, but nothing like the abuse detailed before the commission.

McDonald said he found it hard to accept that anyone who carried out any of 
these actions would have been accepted in the army.

When asked if it was a failure of management at the school, McDonald said he 
accepted some people were treated badly but did not think there were very many.

His attention was drawn to a 2014 Defence abuse response taskforce report 
which found at Balcombe “many complainants experienced multiple types of abuse, 
with particularly high rates of harassment and bullying as well as physical 
abuse”.

The report found the abuse was happening regularly, involving people of equal 
or marginally higher ranks.

McDonald said he was not aware of that report.

The hearing continues.
 