
Safety in numbers does not apply to referees. The six on duty at Goodison Park 
for the first time last night made light work of Uefa's controversial Europa 
League experiment, with two red cards deservedly shown as Everton cruised to 
victory over a dismalAEK Athens <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aekathens>
. And still they got it in the neck.

David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> led criticism 
of the Polish match official, Robert Malek, and his expanded band of brothers 
after a therapeutic night for Everton was blemished by the stoppage-time 
dismissal of Louis Saha. The Everton substitute reacted foolishly to a kick 
from behind by the AEK defender Juanfran, hitting out right in front of the 
referee and inviting the inevitable theatrics and red card that followed.

Extra eyes were not required for the three-match ban Saha landed at the end of 
a game that amounted to no more than a training exercise for Everton. But 
Moyes, who equalled Harry Catterick's record of 11 European wins asEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager last night, overlooked 
the French forward's indiscretion in favour of a more traditional target. "It 
is amazing they see the small arm but not the big kick with all the officials 
they've got now," said the Scot. "They are there to help the referee and, if he 
was helped in the Louis Saha incident, then they got it wrong."

Saha and the AEK defender Carlos Araujo, who was sent off earlier for flicking 
his studs into Sylvain Distin's crown jewels as the assistant referee looked 
on, would have walked regardless of Uefa's decision to post an additional 
assistant next to each goal. In truth, Moyes' pre-match fears over a raft of 
penalties and mass confusion proved unfounded. His irritation arguably stemmed 
from an incident that took the gloss off a performance that was out of context 
with Everton's miserable start to their league campaign.

Everton were too skilled, too strong and too committed for a woeful Greek team 
and, in Diniyar Bilyaletdinov, had a debutant of rich promise. Moyes likened 
the Russia international to the former Goodison great Kevin Sheedy upon his £9m 
arrival from Locomotiv Moscow. What appeared a blatant pull on Evertonian 
heart-strings at the time last night gained some credence, especially given the 
quality of Bilyaletdinov's left foot on a dead ball, and the left midfielder 
was involved in all three first-half goals before succumbing to a groin injury. 
"He enjoyed it and I think the supporters enjoyed him as well," said Moyes.

"There were encouraging signs that he is going to be a very good player. 
Evertonians know more about Kevin Sheedy than I do but he passes the ball 
nicely and crosses it well. He is a modern-type player and keen to learn."

AEK were disrupted early when the central defender Geraldo injured a knee 
while making an awkward challenge on Jô. By the time he hobbled back into the 
fray the Greeks were behind, Bilyaletdinov sweeping a corner to the back post 
and the unmarked Joseph Yobo, who dispatched a simple header beyond Sebastian 
Saja in the visiting goal.

Eight minutes later Everton were awarded another corner courtesy of the 
additional assistant referee, via his mic. Bilyaletdinov delivered accurately 
once more, Marouane Fellaini had a goalbound attempt blocked and Sylvain Distin 
prodded the ball over the line for his first Everton goal since his £5m move 
from Portsmouth. He did not score once in 96 appearances for the Fratton Park 
club.

The influential Steven Pienaar swept a glorious 25-yard shot into the bottom 
corner from a Bilyaletdinov pass, ensuring the second half was played at a 
stroll. Jô scored the fourth goal his performance deserved from Yakubu 
Ayegbeni's pass with eight minutes remaining but the finale would sting Everton 
and Moyes.
 