
The giant ceibo tree looks strangely out of place among the high grasses, 
grazing cows and rusty pipelines on the outskirts of Lago Agrio, this 
ramshackle oil town in the north east corner of Ecuador. Standing at over 40 
metres, the ceibo tree was here first, long before the oil industry arrived in 
the 1960s and perhaps decades before Francisco de Orellana set out on his 
Amazon expedition in 1542.

To the Huaorani, Secoya, Cofan and several other indigenous peoples inhabiting 
the Ecuadorian rainforest, the ceibo tree is a mythical giant, itself a 
micro-ecosystem for thousands of other plants and animals. Nowhere else on 
earth can you witness more closely the intrinsic link between the world's 
craving for oil and the fortunes of forest people and their environment.

Under the United Nations Environment Programme, Ecuador is considered one of 
only 18 megadiverse countries in the world. Its plentiful supply of oil and 
trees presents it with a crucial economic opportunity at an alarming 
environmental cost. This is because all of the oil reserves are located in the 
Oriente, a vast area covering all of Ecuador's rainforest.

Like many developing countries rich in natural resources, Ecuador suffers from 
low economic growth and high rates of poverty and inequality. While 40% of the 
country's annual export earnings are gained from oil, providing a vital boost 
to government revenue, Ecuador has the highest deforestation rate in South 
America. According to Amazon Watch it is thought to have lost over 20% of its 
forest and woodland habitat in less than two decades.

Ecuador's President Rafael Correa and his Government have their work cut out. 
Facing a tough financial situation and with last year's default on 
international debt repayment fresh in the mind, the Government is under 
increasing pressure to extend oil exploration and extraction.

In four decades, seismic testing, pipe-laying, road building and toxic waste 
spillages have devastated the terrain, polluted habitats and severely affected 
the health and well-being of local communities. As Secoya leader Humberto 
Piaguaje told Texaco shareholders in 2007 'our struggle is not for money, we 
want you to repair the damages so our children do not have to continue 
suffering'.

The process of deforestation is familiar to all remote rainforest areas 
throughout the world. As new roads penetrate the forests, colonisation follows 
and settlers extract more timber and introduce cattle and crops.

In recent years the search has been on for a workable strategy that 
compensates Ecuador for not extracting its oil and instead provides a financial 
incentive to preserve the forests and improve the standard of living of 
indigenous communities. Supported by Correa, indigenous and environmental 
groups, this proposal centres on Yasuni national park, a UNESCO World Biosphere 
Reserve. It is being seen as a test case for all rainforest countries and could 
be a key part of the effort to tackle climate change.

In a recent letter to the Government, Huaorani women reinforced their plea, 
declaring that 'if oil exploitation is not stopped, the companies will continue 
to destroy our territory, the companies must leave us in peace, we want clean 
rivers and forests, we want the government to tell these companies of foreign 
countries to stay away. We don't want oil companies to enter our territory, 
never again'.

The World Wildlife Fund estimate the economic value of the ecosystem services 
provided by the Amazon rainforest to be worth a minimum $426 per hectare each 
year. These services range from biodiversity management, clean water supplies, 
raw materials and foodstuffs to water circulation and carbon storage. As their 
recent report on the Amazon Forests declares 'the values offered by the forest 
must be utilised as much as possible to maintain the Amazon ecosystem and the 
services it offers humanity'.

So far, progress in securing international support for Ecuador's carbon 
trading initiative or the Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation mechanism (REDD), whereby developed nations pay a market value for 
forest conservation, have been at best patchy, at worst dismal. If progress 
towards the Millennium Development Goals on trade and development is anything 
to go by a radical shift in political willpower and economic action is needed 
to arrest the pace of deforestation and climate change.

In the past, many forest dependent communities have been overlooked in the 
rush to open up indigenous territory to oil, gas and mining companies. The 
Forests and European Union Resource Network, FERN, argue in their 2008 report 
on REDD that recognition of the rights of local people is a pre-requisite for 
any effective agreement. Calls for stronger governance, respect for land rights 
and improved cooperation are fundamental, according to the Eliasch Review, an 
independent report to the UK government on reducing global forest loss.

Recent disputes in Peru's Amazon region provide a stark reminder of how 
quickly peaceful protests to protect ancestral lands can turn into bloodshed 
when the financial stakes are high. The Cofan tribe in Ecuador are now well 
organised after years of disputes which saw huge tracts of land taken from 
them. 'Now we indigenous people know how to mark our territory' says Toribio 
Aguinda, former President of the Cofan Federation.

Committing the developed world to an effective international financing 
agreement is seen as critical to the success of the UN Climate Change summit in 
December. Individual developed countries are also being asked by environmental 
groups and indigenous organisations to take greater responsibility for their 
trade with developing countries. Whether it is soy cultivation in Brazil, oil 
extraction in Nigeria or industrial logging in Indonesia, national governments 
and multinationals are being challenged to pursue more sustainable and 
responsible trading practices.

If deforestation continues at current rates, some conservationists predict 
that the Ecuadorian Amazon will be completely deforested within 30 years. As 
the last drop of oil leaves the country's shores the last of its magnificent 
ceibo trees may already have been cut down. Perhaps only then will minds be 
concentrated on the consequences of deforestation.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 