
As if to demonstrate that every silver lining has a cloud, researchers in the 
US have shown that older men who enjoy frequent sex raise their chances of 
developing heart problems.

But the same was not seen for older women, who appeared to suffer no 
ill-effects from a robust sex life, and tended to have lower blood pressure 
when they found sex highly enjoyable.

Men in their late 50s to mid-80s who indulged in sexual activity once a week 
or more had twice the risk of heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular 
conditions over the next five years, compared with men who went without, the 
researchers found.


To make matters worse, the men who enjoyed sex the most were more likely to 
suffer heart conditions than those who were not so bothered.


The findings emerge from one of the first large scale studies into the impact 
of sex on the health of older people. More than 2,200 people who enrolled in 
the US National Social Life, Health andAgeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/ageing> project took part in the study at 
Michigan State University.


Hui Liu, a sociologist who led the study, said that older men may come off 
badly because they exhaust themselves more than younger men in an effort to 
reach an orgasm. She said that would “create more stress on their 
cardiovascular system in order to achieve climax”.


Medicines designed to boost sexual function might contribute to the damaging 
effects on men’s hearts, Liu added. High testosterone levels may also play a 
role, by increasing men’s motivation to have sex while predisposing them to 
hypertension.


Sex and the over-60s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/12/sex-over-60s-older-people>
In the study, the US team pored over medical records from 2,204 people who 
were aged 57 to 85 when the first wave of data was gathered in 2005 and 2006. 
The records contained information on heart rate, hypertension, and cases of 
heart attacks, heart failure and stroke. Measurements were also taken of 
biomarkers that are used to predict a person’s risk of stroke and heart attack.


“We found that having sex once a week or more puts older men at a risk for 
experiencing cardiovascular events that is almost two times greater than older 
men who are sexually inactive,” Liu said. Those who found sex with their 
partners “extremely pleasurable” or even merely “satisfying” had a higher risk 
than others.


While an active sex life appeared to harm the physical - if not mental - 
health of older men, it had no such impact on women. Instead, the study 
revealed the better news that enjoying sex in old age protected women from 
developing high blood pressure and so likely reduced their risk of future heart 
problems. “Good sexual quality may protect older women from cardiovascular risk 
in later life,” Liu said.


The findings, Liu believes, challenge the conventional wisdom that sex is good 
for health whatever a person’s age. In light of the latest findings, reported 
in theJournal of Health and Social Behaviour <http://hsb.sagepub.com/>, Liu 
said GPs should talk with their older male patients about the potential risks 
that come with an active sex life. Those who have sex once a week or more might 
even do well to be screened for heart problems later in life, she said.


Older women who enjoy an active sex life may fare better than older men 
because of the beneficial effects of the female sex hormone released during 
orgasm, and the stress-busting effects of a close relationship, the researchers 
say. Liu believes that men in all relationships, even bad ones, are more likely 
to receive support from their partners than women are. “Only women in good 
quality relationships may acquire such benefits from their partner,” she said.

“Although some studies suggest that women’s health is especially vulnerable to 
poor relationships, our results reveal an optimistic finding: women’s 
cardiovascular health can benefit from a rewarding sexual relationship,” the 
researchers add.
 