
America has a new public enemy – oil speculators. The public is not happy with 
the sky-high cost of a tank of petrol and anybody responsible for ratcheting up 
prices is considered worthy of a good kicking.

People are willing to vent their fury on anybody – even on a mild-mannered 
bunch of regulatory bureaucrats.

The Federal Trade Commission has asked for views on proposed fines of up to 
$1m per day for anybody caught manipulating the market for oil, gas or other 
petrochemical products. Responses from the public, which are postedon the 
commission's website 
<http://www.ftc.gov/os/comments/marketmanipulation/index.shtm>, are 
illuminating.

"It just boggles my mind how the US government can sit back and let us be 
effectively raped at the pumps," thunders a West Virginia man, Jeremy Bradley. 
"How long is this going to be permitted to continue? These leeches are nothing 
more than a cancer to society."

Joel Poston of Tennessee is similarly vitriolic: "FTC get off your ass and 
stop sitting there collecting taxpayer dollars and not doing your job. Do it 
today. Impress us all and cause prices to go back to normal."

A Florida respondent, Brook Paschkes, has a constructive suggestion – why, she 
asks, doesn't the government give everybody incentives to install solar panels?

Meanwhile in Kansas, Gary Reinecke suspects routine price-fixing: "Here in 
Wichita, when gas prices go up over night all stations go up in price over 
night, and they say they don't talk to each other."

The Independent Lubricant Manufacturers' Association is very much in favour of 
a clampdown on manipulation – and even wants a broadening of the proposed law.

But the oil industry (surprise, surprise) is opposed. The National 
Petrochemical & Refiners Association, which numbers BP and ExxonMobil among its 
members, reckons a crackdown on manipulation will impose "regulatory burdens 
that outweigh any likely benefits". In a dubious bit of hyperbole, it claims 
legislation to stamp out price manipulation amounts to "government price 
fixing".

Perhaps the last word should go to an anonymous respondent who wrote to the 
FTC under the name "secret" to warn: "It is going to end up with killings at 
the gas stations because people cannot afford gas."

Olympic spirit

An email popped up in my inbox on Friday from a journalist friend in Toronto.
"Are you by any chance watching the Olympic thingy?" he asked, referring to 
Beijing's lavish opening ceremony. "It's all so beautifully understated ... 
you'd hardly know the Chinese had anything to do with it."

Actually, I wasn't watching the ceremony - because Americans weren't allowed 
to watch it live, unlike Canadians, Britons or pretty much any other 
nationality on the planet.

NBC, which has paid more than $600m for exclusive US broadcasting rights to 
the Olympics, decided that the opening ceremony was at an inconvenient time 
because it happened during the morning on America's east coast. So it taped the 
event and showed it "as live" at peak evening viewing time 12 hours later.

While millions around the world were treated to elaborately choreographed 
drummers, the lighting of the flame and flag-carrying teams of athletes, 
Americans were subjected to a media black-out. NBC adopted a stazi-like 
approach to any websites which tried to break its monopoly.

In a bizarre charade, anchormen from NBC's business offshoot, CNBC, presented 
part of their morning news show from a camera position outside the Beijing's 
"bird's nest" stadium but they had to pretend there was nothing going on inside.

Even when a massive fireworks display turned the sky red directly behind them, 
they kept a straight face and completely ignored the bangs asthis marvellous 
screenshot 
<http://tvdecoder.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/08/11/olympics-pay-no-attention-to-those-fireworks-behind-the-anchorman/>
 demonstrates.

It all seems a bit of a shame. Some American viewers were driven to watching 
Spanish-language coverage of the opening ceremony on obscure cable television 
channels. NBC might be maximising their advertising revenue but they're not 
really capturing the Olympic spirit, are they?

Hot and bothered

A blast of good sense from New York's city council 
<http://ap.google.com/article/ALeqM5gKBALvaECHUVzvrB75Fwu6BH9xmwD92HL2Q80> 
which looks set to fine shops which "cool the sidewalk" by leaving their doors 
wide open and their air conditioning on. It's quite common to see stores 
wasting energy in this way at the height of the Big Apple's scorching summer. 
If the bill goes through, first-time offenders will get a warning. Second time, 
it's a $200 fine and the third time, the cost goes up to $400. Bang to rights.
 