
Journalist and author John Lanchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-lanchester> was born in Hamburg in 
1962, grew up in Hong Kong and moved to England aged 10. He has written four 
novels and three non-fiction books, and his work has been translated into more 
than 20 languages. He was awarded the Whitbread first novel prize for his debut
The Debt to Pleasure, and has also received the Hawthornden prize, EM Forster 
award, and the Julia Child award for literary food writing. He regularly 
contributes to theNew Yorker, Granta and the London Review of Books, where he 
is a contributing editor. Lanchester's new book,How to Speak Money, is out on 4 
September.

Book: A la recherche du temps perdu
 Photograph: Culture Club/Getty Images 
This will really annoy everyone, but my touchstone book is Proust. I know 
people think it's pretentious, long-winded and French, but only one of those 
things is true. It's very funny, for a start. It mixes crisp aphorisms with a 
strong sense of the theatrical, so that people are exaggerated, more themselves 
than themselves – almost like Dickens. I've just started reading it again 
because Penguin has a translation by Lydia Davis. She famously writes the 
shortest short stories in the world, and because she's such an unflowery 
writer, she gets the unnecessary perfume out of Proust's prose. Coming back to 
it after 20 years, the world looks like a different place, and you get much 
more out of it.

Album: Bob Dylan – Blood on the Tracks

Like everyone else, I don't listen to records in quite the same way as I used 
to: streaming services encourage you to hop about more. A couple of months ago 
I deliberately listened to this, which was my favourite record when I was a 
kid. It's astonishing how much more you get out of it when you listen to it in 
a sustained way. When you listen to the whole album, you get this full palette 
that you don't when a track catches you cold. It's also his 15th studio album 
and it's his best record. It's really unusual to have your best thing be your 
15th of anything. And there's something encouraging about that: how he kept 
changing, kept going, kept improving.

Museum: The Ashmolean in Oxford

 Photograph: Alistair Laming/Alamy 
When it was renovated in 2009, I was worried it would become like a departure 
lounge at Gatwick, in the way those airy, light, modern things can. But 
although it feels new and modern, it's integrated the old collection 
beautifully. There's a room in here that has my favourite juxtaposition of 
paintings in the world: Paolo Uccello'sThe Hunt in the Forest and Piero di 
Cosimo'sThe Forest Fire. The di Cosimo shows animals running away from a fire – 
there's this hedgehog that has a human face – and at the same time it has all 
the Renaissance qualities of perspective. Both the pictures are in a world 
that's emerging into reason and progress, yet have this strong sense of coming 
out of darkness and delirium.

TV: Game of Thrones
 Photograph: HBO/Courtesy: Everett Collec/Rex 
The thing that's really interesting is that it's struck such a chord. I like 
fantasy, but loads of people don't: it's as if they have an off-switch. They'll 
go: "Well, but there are elves, and elves don't exist", which seems to be so 
spectacularly missing the point. WhenGame of Thrones started being broadcast, I 
felt like HBO had spent a hundred million quid making something specifically 
for me. The sense of danger in it is so interesting: it's a depiction of a 
world that is genuinely dangerous. A lot has been said about the sex and 
violence on the show, but the violence isn't gratuitous. That's what it's 
about: a violent, dangerous, dark world where anybody can die at any moment.

Video game: Red Dead Redemption

I've been really interested in video games, because it's the first entirely 
new potential artform to come along in my lifetime. In games, there's often a 
tension between the story and the bit everybody loves where you go around 
blowing stuff up, and they often struggle to reconcile that. But inRed Dead 
Redemption, the weight of the moral choice becomes part of the game. It makes 
you identify with the main character, someone with a shady past in the American 
west who is trying to be good. You can play it trying to be good or you could 
play it as an outlaw. There's something really interesting about seeing the 
medium evolve towards empathy and emotional involvement.

The Wind Rises

I don't think I'd know about Studio Ghibli if I didn't have children, but they 
have an astonishing body of work.Hayao Miyazaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hayaomiyazaki>, the director, is the antidote 
to Disney's thing about people being completely goodies or completely baddies, 
and knowing what moral the story is going to enforce. InThe Wind Rises he's 
obsessed with planes: they keep recurring as imagery, but the film has a very 
complex ambivalence towards them. The film talks about an aircraft designer 
from the 30s: it captures both flight as a means of escape and the poetic 
ambition of mankind, but also the fact that the planes he designs are also the 
main warplanes used by the Japanese in the second world war.
 