
At the start of Nebraska, Woody Grant (Bruce Dern), confused and old, is seen 
slouching doggedly along a highway on the outskirts of his town. "Hey, bud, 
where ya headed?" asks a solicitous cop. But where can Woodypossibly be headed? 
It takes just one look at the nondescript urban expanse; at the chimney 
belching out fumes in the background; at the sign reading "Billings City 
Limits" (that's Billings, Montana) to know he can't be going anywhere special. 
This is the back of beyond, right? And Woody's surely on the proverbial Road to 
Nowhere.

In fact, Woody is determined to get to Lincoln, Nebraska, where he's convinced 
that a million dollars are his for the claiming. It's usual in American cinema 
to assume that areas such as the stretch between Billings and Lincoln, some 800 
miles away, are indeed nowhere – just part of the "flyover country" crossed 
unnoticed by coast-to-coast plane commuters. But for directorAlexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> this land really is – 
spiritually and geographically – the heart of America. Born and raised in 
Omaha, Nebraska, where he still spends much of his time, Payne has set four of 
his six features in his native state and named his latest after it. A 
lugubrious road comedy, it is hardly a hymn to the excitement of Payne's place 
of origin – seeNebraska and you won't be rushing to visit – yet he has created 
a strangely beautiful visual poem on the state and the Midwest in general.

Nebraska may appear to be a grey journey through a grey landscape of two grey 
men – Woody and his frustrated middle-aged son Dave (Will Forte). But the bleak 
flatness of the Midwestern landscape, captured in black-and-white widescreen by 
cinematographer Phedon Papamichael, has a spare beauty of its own. The film is 
an exploration of forgotten, long undusted corners of middle America – places 
that painter Norman Rockwell might have appreciated for their downbeat quality 
then rejected as being insufficiently mythic. These places are not so much 
melancholy as just plain glum: highways stretch across plains that seem to be 
permanently frosted, small towns have main streets so wide that the buildings 
seem to draw back from one another in bashfulness, scrubby yards surround 
unkempt clapboard houses. Any joy that once resided here seems to have packed 
up and fled for the coasts back in the 1910s.

Before starting the shoot, Payne and Papamichael went on a three-day trip in 
the director's mother's car, tracing the exact route taken by Woody and David. 
"Just being in that landscape creates this feeling of loneliness and 
desolation," Papamichael tells me. "My first impression was just how devoid of 
people it was. Driving into some of these smaller towns, you'd see a sign, 
'Population 20,000'. We'd drive down Main Street and I'd say, 'Where is 
everybody?' We did this trip in summer and nobody's outside." So where were 
they all? "I asked Alexander that. He said, 'I guess they're inside watching 
TV.' People just tune out, there's not a lot to do there."

Payne has sometimes been accused by critics of mocking the people of his 
state, but he has pointed out that Nebraskans are the first people to find his 
films funny (whileNebraska is written not by the director, but Bob Nelson, it's 
still quintessentially Paynean). "I happen to be from here," he said ofNebraska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nebraska> in a recent New Yorker interview. 
"You want to explore the mystery of the place you're from."
 Native son: Alexander Payne, who was born and raised in Nebraska, on location 
for Nebraska, the film. Photograph: Merie W Wallace 
What makes Payne's films compelling is the idea central to so many of them: in 
places that are low on cultural distraction, what becomes fascinating is the 
inhabitants (even if they struggle to find fascination in their own lives). 
With its story of an elderly man exploring his past,Nebraska comes across as an 
accidental sequel to Payne's 2002 movieAbout Schmidt. In that film, Jack 
Nicholson played a newly widowed and retired insurance company executive (Omaha 
is famed as the insurance capital of America) who sets out in a Winnebago to 
see the world for the first time – at least, the part between Omaha and Denver, 
Colorado. Stops include his home town of Holdrege, Nebraska, where his 
childhood house has been torn down and replaced with a Tires Plus franchise.

While it's sad that Schmidt's old home is gone, sadder still is the fact that 
Woody's is still standing, a dilapidated shell propped up amid desolate 
windblown fields and filled with memories of a severe childhood.Nebraska is 
haunted by the past, and not always a happy one. Some of its most blackly comic 
lines occur at the graveyard in the fictional small town of Hawthorne – another 
sparse panorama stretched across the screen – where Woody's cantankerous wife 
Kate (the scene-stealing June Squibb) taunts her dead ex-boyfriends.

There has always been a solid foundation of approachable mundanity in Payne's 
determinedly anti-glamorous comedies – even Hawaii, as seen inThe Descendants 
(2011), has a deeply everyday appearance, like Bournemouth on a temperate bank 
holiday weekend. In his career-making second feature, high-school comedyElection
 (1999), you didn't see much of Nebraska, despite a glimpse of a local paper, 
theOmaha World-Herald. But brief shots of Omaha locations (a power station, 
suburban parkland, playing fields) provided a matter-of-fact specificity that 
said you weren't anywhere special as such, just somewhere concrete – far from 
the generic easy-on-the-eye locations of most US mainstream comedy. Payne likes 
his films rooted in the real: forNebraska, production designer Dennis 
Washington says that he and the director clocked up 12,000 miles recce-ing the 
state's bars and bowling alleys.

It is Payne's most visually elegant film, and he and Papamichael find poetry 
in the most unappetising locations, partly thanks to the use of imposingly 
severe monochrome. Papamichael shot on the digital Arri Alexa camera, but with 
actual film grain fed into the digital stock. "Black and white is king," Payne 
recently said. "It never left the world of fine art photography. Why should it 
leave film?" Black-and-white imagery is inevitably charged with film-history 
echoes, although Papamichael says he and Payne looked at very few films before 
makingNebraska – mainly 1940s and 1950s Japanese films – and rarely as precise 
references. Exceptions were two black-and-white films by Peter Bogdanovich – 
the Depression-set comedyPaper Moon, "specifically for the feel", and The Last 
Picture Show, set in a Texan small town in the early 1950s.

The inhospitable horizons of Nebraska's plains, with towns languishing in 
economic abandonment, also recall John Ford's Depression landscapes inThe 
Grapes of Wrath, photographed by Gregg Toland. But more than any other film, 
Papamichael's images strongly recall Robby Müller's inKings of the Road (1976), 
about a journey through Germany in which director Wim Wenders, ever fixated on 
transatlantic dreams, nevertheless seemed really to be searching for images of 
America. Payne confesses that a prime inspiration forNebraska's look was the 
early black-and-white films of Jim Jarmusch (himself a Wenders acolyte).

It's barely possible to look at highways and interstate signs without thinking 
of the tradition of American still photography that has taken to the great 
outdoors, either to map its landscapes or stare its inhabitants in the face. 
Again, Papamichael says that he and Payne didn't look at particular references, 
but acknowledges the presence of peripatetic US photographers such as Robert 
Frank ("always an influence for his compositions and his shadows") and William 
Eggleston, who was once advised, "photograph the ugly stuff" and went on to map 
a nation of gas stations and shopping malls. Another name is David Michael 
Kennedy: Payne denies that he was influenced by the sleeve photo on a certain 
singer-songwriter album that shares its name with his film, but if the 
through-the-windscreen shot on Bruce Springsteen'sNebraska isn't a direct 
reference, it's nevertheless likely that Kennedy's catalogue of looming skies 
has impinged on the film's repertoire of echoes.

From Billings to Lincoln is a 13-hour drive in normal conditions, but in 
Nebraska the journey takes on (minor-league) mythic proportions – if only 
because of the slowness of Woody and David's progress. Most importantly, father 
and son follow their own route and don't go anywhere much we'd usually consider 
special. They do stop off at one familiar landmark, Mount Rushmore in South 
Dakota. Woody glares sceptically at it, then growls, "Doesn't look finished to 
me … Lincoln doesn't even have an ear. OK, we've seen it."

Tourist sites are not where the interest lies in Payne's films. It lies in 
what we often think of as non-places – seemingly dead, discarded spaces that 
nevertheless spark the deepest memories in a Midwestern Proustian way. "We had 
crew members not just from Nebraska," says Papamichael, "but also from 
Minnesota and Wyoming. And they all said, 'This captures it –this is how I 
remember it as a kid.'"
 