
An explosion on the streets of Manhattan, pipe bombs in New Jersey, and a 
shootout with a terrorist suspect: a jittery election, filled with hyperbole, 
just grew more breathless.

Suspect in New York bombing arrested after shootout with police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
Of course most of that hype has emerged from the mouth of Donald Trump, and he 
embraced the emergence of a new terror campaign well before officials confirmed 
Saturday’s explosion as a bomb.

Whether this helps or hurts Trump’s candidacy depends a lot on whether you are 
already primed for the politics of fear. If Trump and Clinton sound like 
they’re talking to two different audiences, that’s because the polls suggest 
they really are.

The United States is deeply divided not just about how to respond to 
terrorism, but about how serious the terrorist threat is.

Recent surveys have underscored the wide gap in perceptions between 
Republicans on one side, and Democrats and independents on the other.

According to a recent study by the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.people-press.org/2016/09/07/15-years-after-911-a-sharp-partisan-divide-on-ability-of-terrorists-to-strike-u-s/>
, 58% of Republicans think that terrorists are more capable of attacking the 
United States than they were on 9/11. That is 24 points higher than 
independents and 27 points higher than Democrats.

Over the last three years, independents and Democrats have barely changed 
their views on the prospect of terrorist attacks on the homeland. In contrast, 
Republicans have become sharply more concerned, up 18 points in the same period.

The big question about this increase is not whether it’s justified; it plainly 
isn’t. None of the terrorist attacks across the world since 9/11 have come 
close to the mass murders perpetrated on that day.

What has changed, however, is the Republican rhetoric about American weakness 
under President Obama. In this regard, Donald Trump is no different from the 
other dozen candidates he beat in the GOP primaries.

“Under the leadership of Obama and Clinton, Americans have experienced more 
attacks at home than victories abroad,” Trump posted on Twitter on Monday. 
“Time to change the playbook!”

How you react to this depends on what you consider attacks at home or 
victories abroad. As Trump himself has pointed out, the 9/11 attacks were on 
President Bush’s watch: an observation that outraged the GOP foreign policy 
establishment. As for a victory abroad, Trump’s definition of success includes 
trade wars, travel bans, mass deportations and giant border construction.

Trump’s real skill is the politics of excess. Where other officials consider 
the policy implications of their words, Trump lives and dies through the power 
to shock – not the power to scare.

Fifteen years after 9/11, and a decade into our mass experiment with social 
media, we may be numbed to fear. On the streets of Manhattan on Monday, there 
were no signs of New Yorkers changing their daily habits as they did for months 
after the Twin Towers fell.

But the power to shock lingers precisely because it is so hard to break 
through the digital noise of social media. Trump’s willingness to say things 
that are excessive, unjustified and outrageous enables him to.

He lacks the self-restraint of an elected official who may be held responsible 
for his performance. Like the current occupant of the Oval Office, for 
instance. Speaking to reporters inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> on Monday, President Obama urged 
the media to be responsible. “It does not help if false reports or incomplete 
information is out there,” he noted pointedly. “So try to, as much as possible, 
stick to what our investigators say, because they actually know what they’re 
talking about.”

As an attack on the press, this is mild by Donald Trump’s standards. Then 
again, Trump has no desire to calm public fears in any situation.

Obama’s press advice teed up a bigger argument: that stoking fear was 
precisely what terrorists were trying to accomplish. “Even as we have to be 
vigilant and aggressive, both in preventing senseless acts of violence but also 
making sure that we find those who carry out such acts and bring them to 
justice, we all have a role to play as citizens in making sure that we don’t 
succumb to that fear,” he explained.

“By showing those who want to do us harm that they will never beat us, by 
showing the entire world that as Americans we do not, and never will, give in 
to fear, that’s going to be the most important ingredient in us defeating those 
who would carry out terrorist acts against us.”

It’s safe to say this is not a worldview shared by Donald Trump, who tweeted 
out loud about how many hidden terrorists might be lurking in our midst.

“Once again someone we were told is ok turns out to be a terrorist who wants 
to destroy our country & its people – how did he get thru system?” Trumpwrote 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/777910435425226753>.

He was referring to Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami>, the suspect detained 
on Monday, who was a naturalized US citizen.

Unexpected events normally provide the most revealing moments in a 
presidential campaign. And there are few things more unexpected than an actual 
terrorist attack, no matter the number of casualties or the number of foiled 
bombs.

So far voters have favored Hillary Clinton’s response to terrorism over Donald 
Trump’s. According to arecent poll for the New York Times and CBS News 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/16/us/politics/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-poll.html>
, 49% of voters think Clinton would do a better job on terrorism and national 
security, a four-point lead over Trump. By a 22-point margin, Clinton is 
favored over Trump to handle foreign policy. Whether that lead can be sustained 
in the immediate aftermath of a real-life bomb remains to be seen.

Clinton indulged in her own hyperbole on Monday by focusing on Trump’s 
reaction to the weekend bombs. She called Trump a “recruiting sergeant for the 
terrorists” by supporting the terrorists’ notion of a war with Islam, rather 
than a war with jihadis. “The kinds of rhetoric and language Mr Trump has used 
is giving aid and comfort to our adversaries,” she told reporters.

This presidential campaign has now entered the final, fevered stages of the 
cycle. A week out from the first debate, questions of temperament and terrorism 
are likely to dominate the next several days, if not weeks.

Like everything else in this contest, the cooler heads are unlikely to 
prevail. Even when they favor better policy.
 