
I had first learnt to steer a car at a very young age by getting my parents to 
reverse a Triumph Dolomite to the top of the drive. I would take off the 
handbrake and let it roll down and partly around our house until the momentum 
ceased. Soon enough I could reverse myself, then circle the house in second 
gear. For an hour. My dad would yell out the kitchen window that I was making 
him dizzy and wearing out the clutch. That limited circular tract was the 
extent of my freedoms and I recall chomping at the bit for the possibilities of 
a more variable and changing scenery before me.

In 1982 those vast sceneries became real when I passed my driving test on a 
rainy October afternoon. The testing officers were sent up from Glasgow. It was 
such a small rural community there could be no risk of local favours bestowed. 
After all, was this not the town where Prince Philip, with his usual diplomacy, 
once asked a driving instructor: "How do you keep the natives off the booze 
long enough to get them past the test?"

Even clobbered with drink it would still have been very difficult for me to 
fail my driving test on that day. The town was deserted, with the wind blowing 
in impressively from the sea, saturating the facades of the buildings. There 
weren't even pedestrians on pavements, never mind other cars to pit me against. 
My appointed civil servant peered in vain through the lashing wipers and into 
the smoky distances, willing other vehicles of any kind to materialise, but the 
town's single roundabout remained empty each time we re-crossed it. The circle 
bus did once appear in the far distance and I felt the psychic messages to step 
on the gas so I could tackle it. But I drove on with a deliberate caution.

What did appear out of the vapours, close to the accepted site for handbrake 
hill starts, were two wet dogs copulating with real enthusiasm in the middle of 
the narrow road. I geared down rather stylishly. "Move carefully round the…" I 
watched him struggle uncomfortably for the word "…obstruction and continue, 
please." I had to virtually nudge the animals with the left wing of the car to 
achieve coitus interruptus. A sensitive display of clutch control in first 
gear. As I drove onward, I glimpsed the man out of my eye. Both of us were 
trying to suppress laughter and I felt a surge of confidence.

I used this dog incident in my first novel, Morvern Callar, when Morvern sits 
her driving test. In that novel, for the eponymous heroine passing her driving 
test is a huge and symbolic possibility of escape. She fails her test and this, 
to her, is a tragedy; a dramatic turning point. She has spent all her limited 
savings on driving lessons with no further means to continue. I passed my test 
that first time and, unlike Morvern, found myself presented with all sorts of 
new possibilities and gifts.

THE TERM "BOY RACER" would not describe me that year. I would set out in the 
mornings, driving slowly in my parents' new Ford Escort, with an ironic – for 
Scotland – sunroof of tinted glass. My parents were under the impression I was 
taking the car into town for the day to park somewhere furtive in that shifty 
manner of teenagers.

In fact I would drive, often alone or sometimes with pals, 30 or 60, sometimes 
even hundreds of miles up and then down through the Western Highlands in wild 
and extravagant loops, returning in dramatic sunsets through Glencoe.

Sometimes I had specific destinations: ruined castles, waterfalls or hills 
which I would scramble up to look down on that silver car 1,000ft below. But 
more often my long car journeys would be strangely aimless, with no arrival; 
changing cassettes and tossing them into the clattering box, the sensation of 
travelling itself indefinably more valuable than any excuse of a destination.

I would often pick up hitchhikers and happily deviate my route by 50 or 60 
miles to accommodate their needs. I did have an unfair but typical prejudice 
towards female hitchhikers. Yet I'd settle for couples, sometimes with 
charmingly limited English. It often occurred to me that for a laugh I should 
have taken the garden axe and laid its shining length in the empty boot where 
they went to hoist in their heavy backpacks.

My parents owned a small hotel in Oban and they both worked very hard. My 
mother cultivated a market garden at the family home for the hotel kitchens. 
Meanwhile, I was what I liked to call "between jobs". I still am.

In the early 1980s in our community, for any 17-year-old male a driving 
licence and an available car carried massive kudos. It was a huge lifestyle 
change; I was luckier than most and tried to share it. The time-held virtues of 
car culture – its connection to American rock'n'roll, semi-independence and, 
yes, attraction to the opposite sex – were articles of faith in our part of the 
country. When we all sawAmerican Graffiti, we sadly identified with it.

Communities, country dances, friends and locations of morbid interest were 
widely spread. From the age of 15 my male friends and I had learnt to walk 
completely outrageous distances home from dances. In the wee small hours only 
isolated vehicles moved along the trunk roads in our direction. Usually fish 
lorries. We stuck our thumbs out hopefully as they enthusiastically 
accelerated. On one occasion a female pal accompanied us in her short skirt 
with a wise change of footwear: wellies with two pairs of socks. A truck 
stopped and the driver offered her a lift but not the boys. In solidarity she 
trudged on homeward with us.

Eight- to 15-mile walks home were not frowned upon nor questioned as we moved 
in high spirits beneath the mountains. Waterfalls sounded high up in the 
darknesses above; umbrellas were an un-thought-of and effete commodity as the 
rains came slamming down. We might have left dances drunk, after half-bottles 
of vodka and tins of beer taken up the sides of the dance halls, but we arrived 
home sober, the formative hangovers slaked by drinking from the innumerable and 
generous peaty burns at the roadside.

Income differences between families seemed fairly irrelevant when we were 
younger. It was a close-knit village community and the kids from the bigger 
houses played in and out of the council houses and vice versa. But suddenly the 
availability of cars began to divide some of us around the age of 17.

My parents owned two cars, a fairly outlandish extravagance for those years. 
And, like most men, my father had that great enthusiasm for fast and pricey 
cars; an enthusiasm he indulged to my mother's disdain. He also had a habit of 
crashing those cars spectacularly while I was on board. Not wearing seatbelts, 
my dad and I were luckily unscathed in two fairly brutal crashes. In the first 
we rolled over and over, down a steep embankment, but the eight-track ofJohnny 
Cash at San Quentinkept happily twanging away, even after we both came to rest 
on the inverted roof.

In another crash, as we overtook a lorry and hit black ice, a wooden road 
barrier passed in one rear door window and out the other, like a caber. Any 
back-seat passenger would have been decapitated.

These crashes had turned me into a fairly cautious and steady driver, even a 
nervous one. This didn't go unnoticed by my contemporaries who, from the 
passenger seat, urged increases of speed on all those long journeys to nowhere 
in particular. When driving alone, I'd often pull over into a lay-by and wait 
20 minutes rather than try to overtake a lorry.

I naturally bonded with a friend who had access to his own car – fitted with a 
roll bar and a souped-up engine. I found it impossible not to leave his vehicle 
without my hands shaking. I rightly predicted that roll bar was going to come 
in handy.

He rang me from a telephone box late one night with a rueful tone and 
explained he'd jumped the road out on the peat moss and I had to pick him up 
before the police found him. He was drunk. The police would have needed to be 
vigilant. He'd flown his car so far out into the black bogs that you couldn't 
see through the darkness to where it stood, with its wheels sunk in the mire. 
He was plastered in mud from the waist down so I took him home in the Escort's 
boot with the back seats pulled forward, through which he shouted his 
conversation.

We returned to salvage the car's contents at first light. Within it lay a 
substantial archive of heavy-metal cassettes, back issues ofPlayboy and 
never-used contraceptives. But by dawn, all that remained visible of that car 
was the red tray of the roof with an inch of coppery water covering it. He was 
a sometime deer stalker and revealed that there had been a stag's severed hind 
leg defrosting in the boot. Archaeological teams of the distant future are in 
for an anthropological eye-opener when they excavate that one.

My friend became a reluctant but all-too-frequent passenger in the Escort. 
Slouched beside me, filling the ashtray with contraband butts, roaring commands 
to overtake everything which hesitated, bashing the dash violently with his 
boot, bemoaning the lack of proper heavy-metal cassettes.

I SLYLY DISCOVEREDa proven psychological truth about my parents. In those days 
petrol was 60p to 70p a gallon. Today it is £6 a gallon. My parents never 
seemed to notice the miles accumulating on the clock, but once or twice they 
made swift, cutting comments about the petrol tank in the Escort running 
mysteriously low. I soon discovered that if the fuel gauge was always kept just 
on the positive side of the half-full mark, no comment was ever made.

I could see how my financial resources would dwindle as time went on. After 
all, I had other vital teenage expenses: records, clothes, beer. I saw an end 
to the long drives one day, unless I undertook an act of commitment there and 
then. You could call it an investment plan for the future.

At the back of the tool shed my father had 24 ex-World War Two jerry cans. 
British Army issue – sturdy metallic beasts with brass screw tops. They had 
come with my father's highly suspect purchase of an ex-army Bedford truck in 
the early 1950s, "requisitioned" by his old army buddies. With this truck my 
father had run a successful coal delivery business on the Isle of Mull. He had 
maintained an illicit diesel dump high up on the island glen to outfox his 
pesky coal competitor, who also co-owned the local petrol pumps and would 
always hang up the Closed sign as he saw my father's truck approach.

I took inspiration from my dad. I accumulated 11 or 12 jerry cans full of 
what, in those pre-unleaded days, was called Four Star. A hell of a lot of 
Molotov cocktails. I concealed this stash, with a plastic funnel, close to the 
edge of the single-track road in the woods. As money dwindled I could still 
journey forth with ease and top up the tank to above the halfway mark. Of 
course it sometimes resulted in me driving all over Scotland with two full 
jerry cans of petrol in the boot.

By that spring I had a girlfriend. She was 17. When I first set eyes on her I 
thought we were acquainted, then realised I'd dreamt of her looks. And that 
voice. The second sentence Tessa had ever said to me was: "Well, you've got a 
very nice car." So it was all true!

She was a romantic Jacobite and for our maiden drive we headed high into the 
mighty north, for Culloden battlefield – a modest 200-mile round trip with a 
jerry can stashed in the boot. After six miles of mild fumigation in petrol 
fumes we were in a lay-by, as she was violently car sick. By 50 miles we'd 
stopped six times. Her stomach adjusted, but we both agreed we shouldn't risk 
getting out of the car when we reached the battlefield in case she lost her 
hard-won car legs. We simply drove back and forth across the battlefield then 
headed for home. Surely, to this day, the romantic apex of her life?

I often wonder what effect a landscape has upon a young imagination. As a 
novelist I know I operate in a converted landscape of my own. Yet that basic 
landscape was safely filed and sealed during that year of the long drives.

It's always struck me that when I finally could drive a car that year, I never 
once headed for the cities of Glasgow or Edinburgh. Moving sublimely beneath 
the mountains, watching the weather's moody change, or crossing Rannoch Moor 
with windows down and music loud, rivers falling in white straps over the 
gashes of rock – all this beauty was the immediate reward in itself, which 
multiplied.

I left home soon after this period and I even drove in America on a little 
visit. For 17 years I could never afford nor even wished to own a car. 
Disconnected from those particular landscapes, a car seemed a huge irrelevance 
to me.

Occasionally today, I drive those self-same country ways. The landscapes move 
by on either side of me, gloriously unchanged, though the forestry has grown 
high. Yet these places have become strangely unseated by the landscapes of my 
imagination in those books I write. I have made my choice and settled for this 
mysterious exchange, but somehow feel I've burnt up some of that precious and 
private beauty. Yet sometimes I see again the dusk roads ahead of me, and still 
recall all the dreams we talked about and shared and that I was lucky enough to 
live out – for when young people speak, it is really their dreams they talk of.
 