
How to do the Atkins diet
The Atkins diet is meant to be a lifelong approach to eating, rather than a 
lose-weight-quick routine. There are four phases, each offering a slightly 
wider choice of foods than the last. The first, and most harsh, is the 
induction phase where your carbohydrate intake has to be reduced to 20g a day. 
This compares to a normal daily intake of up to 300g. Induction is what most 
people think of when Atkins springs to mind. It is a harsh regime with very few 
choices of food and is the closest the diet gets to its steaks and greasy 
fry-up reputation.

After a minimum of two weeks, you move to ongoing weight loss (OWL). Here, you 
can increase your intake of carbs by 5g a day until you stop losing weight. You 
can then make a choice - cut carbs by a small amount and keep losing pounds or 
prepare to set yourself up for eating the Atkins way for life. The 
pre-maintenance and maintenance phases allow you to eat a whole range of new 
foods (even the odd slice of bread) as long as you stay within your personal 
threshold (which you worked out during OWL). This threshold can be raised if 
you do a lot of exercise and the idea is to just eat enough carbs so that you 
don't start gaining weight again.

My experiment
There are clear-cut rules, but the diet is not easy to follow. Despite my best 
efforts to eliminate every conscious carb in my diet, I still ended up eating 
about 17g a day on average (that's from my usual level closer to 150g a day). 
Proteins went up from 71g to 73g a day and fat from 98g to 113g a day and my 
intake of saturated fats increased to double the recommended amount. However, I 
managed to reduce my calorie intake from about 2,000 a day to 1,500.

I avoided exercising throughout the experiment not only because I'm lazy but 
so that the end results would be unaffected. Even so, I started at 87.9kg and, 
10 weeks later, weighed 80.8kg. My body fat went from 27% to 24.8%. So, some 
good came out of the experiment. The downside was that my bad cholesterol went 
up in relation to the good - this could increase my risk of heart disease in 
future. Also, thanks to my ketotic state, it is possible that any 
micronutrients I was taking in would not be properly absorbed.
 