
He gave the nation a glimpse of his role as Doctor Who on Christmas Day, but 
before that series returns viewers will first have a chance to re-examine the 
political machinations ofPeter Capaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi>, as he takes on the 
role of Cardinal Richelieu in BBC1's gritty, updated take on the tale of the 
Three Musketeers.

The 10-part drama, which will begin next month and appears destined for a 
Saturday-night slot, is a modern take on the Alexandre Dumas tale without doing 
what its writer Adrian Hodges described as the "full Sherlock".

The feathers and the tabards are gone – fans of the 1973 Richard Chamberlain 
film will be disappointed – and in their place is a world that is a "bit 
smelly, a bit dirty", said Hodges. "But it's still about heroes," he said. 
"There are lots of anti-heroes on TV, and there is always room in the world for 
heroes."

The ghost of Malcom Tucker, the foul-mouthed spin doctor memorably portrayed 
by Capaldi over seven years ofThe Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it>, inevitably hangs 
heavy. Capaldi, said Hodges, has an "extraordinary quicksilver mind. He can be 
funny, mercurial and extremely deadly, often in the same sentence.

"You bring that little bit of people's association with [Tucker's] character. 
Peter wouldn't have done it if he was just the Sheriff of Nottingham. You've 
got to give Peter ambiguity, a real character," said Hodges.

"Richelieu was a great moderniser; he wasn't a villain, he was pragmatic. If 
someone is in the way and the only way of getting them out of the way is to 
kill them, then that's what he will do, but he won't do it because he likes 
killing people."

Even Tucker never did that, although there are echoes of the way he dealt with 
ineffectual MPs as the cardinal inveigles King Louis XIII to do his bidding. 
"We had one moment where Peter said, 'I can't really say that, it's kind of 
similar to something I said in The Thick of It'," recalled Hodges. "The truth 
is you write the character before the actor is cast. Nobody can be unaware of 
how brilliant he was in that role; he is going to bring a little bit of that to 
it, just like every great actor does."

Hodges' updating includes a mixed-race Porthos, played by newcomer Howard 
Charles. "He was born in the 'court of miracles', the 17th-century version of 
the ghetto," said Charles. A long roll call of guest stars includes Vinnie 
Jones, Tara Fitzgerald, Ashley Waters, John Lynch and Sean Pertwee.

Unusually for a story about the musketeers perhaps, it also features a number 
of prominent roles for women. "In modernising the series, we wanted the women 
to be as equally powerful and impressive as the men," Jessica Pope, its 
executive producer, said.

As well as Fitzgerald, who plays the king's mother, the cast includes Maimie 
McCoy, who starred as the young Joyce Hatto in Victoria Wood's BBC1 drama 
Loving Miss Hatto, as Milady de Winter, and Tamla Kari, who was in The 
Inbetweeners Movie and BBC3 sitcom Cuckoo, as D'Artagnan's love interest, 
Constance Bonacieux.

Pope said it was important for modern audiences to have a range of characters 
they can relate to. "We tried to have women who had a real sense of their own 
destiny and weren't just add-ons to the main event."

Filmed over six months in the Czech Republic – chosen above rival locations 
such as Dublin and Canada because it most closely resembled 17th-century Paris 
– the BBC hopes it will be a global hit. Co-funded by the corporation's 
commercial arm, BBC Worldwide, it will air in the US on the cable channel BBC 
America.

"The story is known almost everywhere, which helps," said Hodges. "Will it 
work in America? I haven't got a bloody clue, but what you hope is it works 
everywhere."

If it is not the "full Sherlock", a modern-day version of the story – "That 
wouldn't work. Would they be the SAS or something?" said Hodges – then neither 
is it the "full Game of Thrones".

"It's an adult show that is nevertheless accessible to the whole family," said 
Hodges. He explained in more detail: "We don't have a lot of swearing, full 
nudity or Peckinpah levels of blood. But what we do have is a show that feels 
real, that approaches sexuality and the violence of the age, and where actions 
have consequences."

Hodges, whose previous credits include BBC1's Survivors and Primeval on ITV, 
said he hoped the show, which touches on issues such as slavery and domestic 
terrorism, would resonate with the present day. "It isn't hard to parallel the 
hatred the Catholics felt for the Huguenots with people of different religious 
persuasions now," he said.
 