
• It was a President's Day massacre. Like vultures descending on a carcass, 
bargain hunters circled the aisles of a flagship branch of the bankrupt 
electronics retailer Circuit City for a liquidation sale this week.

At the cavernous Union Square outlet in Manhattan, clock radios and DVDs were 
disappearing off the shelves and laptop computers could be bought for barely 
$600 (£420).

As New Yorkers shoved their way purposefully around, empty sections of the 
store were closed off with tape that looked like the stuff used by police at 
crime scenes. Throwing sales etiquette to the wind, a bearded, 
eccentric-looking employee provided an eerie soundtrack by constantly yelling: 
"Buy American! If you're going to buy, buy American!"

The Circuit City chain of 567 stores employed 30,000 people before it went 
belly up last year. It was America's second biggest electronics retailer, 
behind BestBuy, but its name will soon disappear from malls and main streets.

On the same block as Circuit City in Union Square is a giant Virgin Megastore 
containing 60,000 square feet of selling space. It will shut in April, with 200 
job losses, to make way for a branch of a thrifty fashion chain, Forever 21, 
which does a rapid turnover in $10 T-shirts and $30 jeans.

The recession is becoming ever more evident in New York. On the subway, 
speeches from the homeless have taken a financial tinge. On a train recently, I 
heard one man lobby for donations with a newfangled spiel - he told commuters 
that he had been a chef at a restaurant in the financial district.

"When the market crashed last fall, I lost my job and I lost my apartment in 
Jersey City," said the man, who gave his name as Andrew. "I've spent 90 days in 
a homeless shelter. I'm a Rutgers University graduate. This is embarrassing."

Shops are advertising deep discounts, often of 60% or more. Gawker has a map 
<http://gawker.com/5155144/the-recession-map-of-nolita> showing the 
predominance of sales and shutdowns in trendy Nolita.

The Rainbow Room at the top of the Rockefeller Centre is closing its casual 
eaterie. EvenBotox is on sale 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_4g75slnk7qQ/SZsmLii0T9I/AAAAAAAABiY/SbPnXKLPjtA/s1600-h/botox.JPG>
. The Big Apple is losing its affluent sheen, for sure.

• Everybody's favourite birthday boy, the Blackstone boss Stephen Schwarzman, 
is learning to grow old gracefully or, at least, slightly more quietly.

The billionaire private equity tycoon raised eyebrows two years ago when he 
threw a lavish $3m bash for his 60th birthday, attended by New York's great and 
good, complete with private performances by Rod Stewart and Patti LaBelle. 
Critics wondered whether it was wise to draw so much attention to the 
industry's tax-efficient riches.

This week, Schwarzman's 62nd birthday was apparently marked in modest style – 
a brief celebration with cake and drinks in Blackstone's boardroom. According 
to a website,Recessionwire 
<http://www.recessionwire.com/2009/02/18/plane-folly/>, there was one very 
Schwarzman-like touch – flatscreen televisions around the room showed maps of 
Schwarzman's prolific air travel around the world over the last year.

I would love to hear more about this but Blackstone's PR man, Peter Rose, is 
at his most unenlightening. He emails: "There are many facts wrong here, but I 
see no percentage in commenting."

• In the middle of a news story on Sir Allen Stanford this week, the Wall 
Street Journal offered a helpful description for Americans of that strange 
sport in which the errant billionaire likes to dabble: "Dating from 1744, 
cricket has some similarities to baseball, although it can baffle many who are 
more familiar with baseball. A pitcher (known as the bowler), surrounded by 
fielders, throws a leather ball in an overarm action onto the ground towards a 
batter (batsman). A catcher (wicketkeeper) waits behind."

That's cleared that up, then.
 