
A few hopeful myths get blasted in the August ABC statistics for newspaper 
websites. Myth one: that seeing the Times disappear behind a paywall would 
transform prospects for theTelegraph, Guardian et al. Actually not much has 
happened. The Guardian and Telegraph (up 34.6% and 31.8% in a year 
respectively) are powering away much as they were when the Times made nobody 
pay. Myth two: paywalls would increase, not diminish, demand for the printed 
product. Forget it – just look atTimes print circulation falling below 500,000 
and see that there are no ripples, let alone waves.

Myth three – as propagated by Len Downie, former executive editor of the 
Washington Postin his James Cameron lecture at the City University last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/23/huffington-post-parasites-washington-post>
 – is a suitable subject for scorn and tears. "Revealing photos of and stories 
about entertainment celebrities account for much of the highly touted web 
traffic to theHuffington Post," said Len. "Though they purport to be a new form 
of journalism, these aggregators are primarily news parasites living off the 
journalism produced by others". In short, these aren't proper sites produced by 
proper news journalists.

What's this on the August ABCs <https://www.theguardian.com/media/abcs>, 
though?Mail Online, with 2.5 million browsers on average every day, and 45.5 
million browsers a month, is storming away – up 51.1% year on year. This is the 
site, remember, with only 25 editorial seats in its online office, and 
absolutely no integration with the printed product (which in turn doesn't use 
the site's yards of celebrity coverage). It's not a proper paper, Downie might 
say. It doesn't try to do everything Paul Dacre's print version does. It's 
there to defend theDaily Mail, not supplant it (and make a profit in the 
process).

But that doesn't make it a useless parasite ripe for Downie damnation. It just 
makes it successful, and different. Only myth sets the same goals for print and 
online provision. Technology, targeting and ambition make them different.
 