
There are not enough jobs in Australia for the number of people with limited 
skills and experience who are looking for work, according to a new report.

It shows there is only one job advertised for every six low-skilled jobseekers 
in Australia, and the problem is worsening.

The Anglicare report, Positions Vacant? When the Jobs Aren’t There, has warned 
the growing complexity of the economy has contributed to a downward trend for 
lower-skilled roles over the last decade, and an increase in demand for 
high-level roles.

Ill or injured jobseekers lose welfare if they can't take up training programs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/01/ill-or-injured-jobseekers-lose-welfare-if-they-cant-take-up-training-programs>
It raised concerns about the number of low-skilled people being pushed below 
the poverty line because the labour market can no longer accommodate them.

According to the report, 13% of all jobs advertised in May were for 
entry-level positions, which require year 10 or equivalent education, marking a 
steep decline from 21% in 2006. By comparison, more than 37% of jobs advertised 
in May were for high-level positions, which require a bachelor degree or higher 
qualification.

Over the past 12 months, positions at the highest skill level were the most 
frequently advertised, averaging 60,000 a month, compared with just 25,000 
positions for the lowest skill level.

Tony Nicholson, the executive director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence, said 
it was becoming harder for unemployed and low-skilled people to find a job in 
Australia. “Our modern economy is placing a greater focus on knowledge and 
service-based industries, it’s placing a real premium on skills and 
qualifications and experience,” he said on Monday.

“As a consequence, we’re seeing a dramatic decline in the level of 
low-skilled, entry-level jobs – the type of jobs that, in past decades, 
unemployed people could have easily walked into and used as a base to build a 
career path.”

Nicholson said even in areas of strong employment growth, such as social care 
and health, employers now demand that employees have qualifications and skills.

He said the government needed to understand that unemployed people need help 
to develop the skills and capabilities to match the types of jobs being created 
by the modern economy. “This reality is starting to dawn on many policymakers,” 
he said.

The Anglicare report condemns the “continuing public campaign in politics and 
the media” that suggests people without work are entirely responsible for their 
own circumstances, and that they could and should try harder and more 
successfully to get a job.

It says policymakers need to understand that the economy has become 
increasingly complex. “Disadvantaged job seekers confront additional barriers 
to employment,” the report says.

Coalition should not target poorest for budget repair, says peak welfare group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/coalition-should-not-target-poorest-for-budget-repair-says-peak-welfare-group>
“They also face a strong presumption that there would be work available to 
them if they tried harder, and – for those on income support – have to live 
with a number of activity tests and financial penalties informed by that 
presumption.

“In other words, rather than looking at the most effective mechanisms for 
improving participation by the unemployed, especially disadvantaged jobseekers, 
successive governments have adopted approaches aimed at shaping behaviour and 
punishing people when they do not respond as required.”

The report comes days after Christian Porter, the social services minister, 
­warned the welfare system was flawed because “thousands of parents claiming 
government benefits are financially better off not getting a job”.

He made the case for welfare cuts by claiming a single parent with four 
children could receive $52,523 from various government payments, an amount more 
than the $39,841 take-home pay of the median worker.

But his claim has been hotly disputed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/30/governments-scare-tactic-about-the-welfare-system-treats-us-like-idiots>
.
 