
This time last year, Justine Henin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/justine-henin> was in the Congo working for 
Unicef. Tomorrow she will walk on to the Rod Laver Arena with every expectation 
of pulling off one of the most unlikely comebacks in modern sport.

By any standards, it would be remarkable if she were to beat Serena Williams 
to win the women's singles of thisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, given she has not played 
seriously for 20 months. Yet her journey of rediscovery in Australia this month 
suggests this is a believable scenario, the climax to a story that has been a 
gift for the tournament organisers.

Williams, the world No1, is the defending champion; Henin, because she has not 
yet played three tournaments in her return, is unseeded. The last unseeded 
winner of the event was ... Williams, in 2007 when, returning from injury and 
rated 81st in the world, shethrashed Maria Sharapova in just over an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/29/tennis.australianopen20071>.

Much has changed in the women's game since then. Williams, driven to the point 
of obsession and strapped up like an Egyptian mummy, has gone on to strengthen 
her grip at the top of the ratings, whileHenin quit tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/may/14/tennis> to "find herself", a 
seven-times slam champion whose priorities were no longer on the court.

Henin sounded a warning that she was no washed-up pug when she went through a 
two-hour marathon before losing to compatriot Kim Clijsters in the final of the 
Brisbane International on the eve of the Open.

In a curious circling of the story, Clijsters herself came back, unseeded, 
after two years out, in last year's US Open – and beat Williams 6-4, 7-5 in the 
infamous semi-final in which the loser received a point penalty after swearing 
at an official over a foot fault.

The message for Williams might be: beware unseeded Belgians making comebacks.

Henin declared herself "physically exhausted" after the Brisbane final, which 
Clijsters won 6-3, 4-6, 7-6 and she has had to fight to get through here. But 
there is steel in her eyes. She did not come this far to be part of an 
unfulfilled fairytale.

There is history between Henin and Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/jun/06/tennis.frenchopen20031>, who was 
livid with her for not letting her replay a first serve which hit the net in 
the 2003 French Open, although Henin had indicated she wasn't ready. Henin 
refused to plead for her, won the point – and, eventually, the match.

A hostile Roland Garros crowd upset Williams, who broke down in tears later. 
The petty animosity between the players, though, has given way to professional 
regard, if not wholesale warmth.

"It's far away now," Henin said. "It's a long time. We exchanged a few words 
here. There is a lot of respect between the two of us, a lot. There's no 
problem between us."

Getting away from tennis, she said, was one of the "two best decisions I took 
in my life". The other one? "To come back here. But, for me, it's not my whole 
life now.

"My mind was somewhere else," she said, reflecting on her time in Africa doing 
charity work when this tournament was reaching its conclusion 12 months ago.

"At the time, I could never think that a year later I would be in this final. 
It seems a little bit unreal. I was so far away from tennis. I was living just 
an amazing other experience."

"I'm feeling better," she said of the return to the physical intensity of 
high-level competitive tennis. "My muscles start to recover. Tomorrow I'll have 
other things to deal with – but I just try to enjoy the moment."

Henin had a quick semi-final against China's Zheng Jie; Williams had to dig 
deep to beat another Chinese player, Li Na, 7-6, 7-6. Nevertheless, Williams is 
the rightful favourite.

Henin says playing Williams, "is more than a dream for me. It's a perfect 
challenge. I love this kind of situation. We had great battles in the past. We 
played our best tennis when we played each other. At the beginning it was quite 
difficult for me to face Serena. Then slowly but surely I could change it a 
little more. It's going to be really mental."

Serena, speaking after she and her sister, Venus, had won the doubles, agreed. 
"I think that's a really good point. It definitely will be mental, about who 
wants it more. We both want it. We'll see who's playing better.

"I definitely feel hungry. I have a chance to tie Billie Jean King, which 
would be great. But I don't really think about that, because I'm OK where I'm 
at, too."

If Henin found peace and perspective away from tennis, so did Williams when 
she was out for a year with injuries that might have ended her career. "I feel 
like I have no pressure," she said. "I'm still here and I'm still alive, and 
that's nothing less than a miracle. So I feel good."
 