
It is an age-old journalistic dilemma: the reporter discovers information that 
he or she believes is in the public interest to disclose, but the government 
says lives will be put at risk by doing so.

To publish or not to publish? How do editors and reporters make that decision? 
How did journalists make it when working on the Afghan war logs published by 
the Guardian a fortnight ago?

The logs are tens of thousands of internal US tactical reports by troops 
operating in Afghanistan between January 2004 and December 2009. The detailed 
background to the acquisition of the 92,000 documents can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/25/wikileaks-war-logs-back-story> 
andhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/02/afghan-war-logs-wikileaks>.

The Guardian, along with the New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> and Der Spiegel, spent weeks 
deploying teams of journalists to comb through the raw material of the 
documents, which were eventually published on WikiLeaks. Each approached the 
task slightly differently.

There was immediate criticism from both governments and individuals of 
publication. Critics focused on the risk to soldiers on the ground and those 
Afghans who have co-operated with Nato forces. Much of the anger came from 
other newspapers, but the Guardian has received only two complaints from 
readers who believed we were wrong to publish.

For David Leigh, the Guardian's head of investigations, the issue was simple: 
"We always erred on the side of caution and we believe we didn't run anything 
that endangered individuals' lives."

Nick Davies, who brokered the deal to gain access to the WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> documents, is equally adamant:

"The first time I spoke to Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> [the founder of WikiLeaks] 
in Brussels in mid-June, before I saw the documents I said there are two 
issues: one, there may be nothing of interest here, and two, there must be a 
risk that publication would put people on the ground at risk. There was always 
a big shining light on that right from the outset. It's not our job to get 
people killed and I am not interested in publishing anything that might get 
someone killed.
"There were 92,000 documents and we published fewer than 300 of them. Each one 
was read from top to toe with the conscious aim of excluding anything that 
might endanger people on the ground.
"You can't have governments decide what should be published and what 
shouldn't, therefore we, as journalists, have to make our own judgments."

The documents themselves were classified as "secret" in the US. The equivalent 
in the UK is "confidential". That is lower than a "top secret" classification 
in the UK.

At the New York Times, where the US-based American journalists have the 
benefit of the first amendment – a key section of which is: "Congress shall 
make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press" – they 
nevertheless took a slightly different approach.

Eric Schmitt, one of the authors of the NYT piece said: 

"I can't speak for the newspaper as a whole, but I've received a handful of 
emails complaining about this point so I expect we've received several 
complaints.
"On this story, as with all sensitive military/ intelligence/ national 
security articles, we took great care to mitigate any threat to US service 
members, Afghan security forces and informants working with the US in 
Afghanistan; as well as US national security, and sensitive sources and 
methods. We redacted [removed] the names and other identifying details from the 
incident reports we published in the Times. Before publication, we asked the 
White House, CIA and Defense Department if they had any objections to specific 
information being made public. They had a couple of specific requests, which we 
honoured because we did not feel their omission would lessen the impact of the 
articles. Since publication, we have not received any specific complaints on 
this point from the Pentagon."

In the UK, newspapers are encouraged to approach the defence press and 
broadcasting advisory commitee (DPBAC), which is not part of the Ministry of 
Defence but is nevertheless chaired by the permanent undersecretary of state 
for defence. The role of the committee, which has press and broadcasting 
members but no one from the Guardian, is to advise publications on matters of 
national security. Journalists don't have a legal obligation to take the 
advice. The Guardian's legal advice was quite clear that it faced potential 
actions by the US government under the US Espionage Act and the UK's Official 
Secrets Act. Not much incentive to go to the DPBAC then?

Air Vice-Marshal Andrew Vallance is the DPBAC secretary. If we had taken the 
documents to his committee he says he would not have felt obliged to tell the 
MoD and thus potentially trigger an injunction, which was a very real fear for 
the Guardian's editor, Alan Rusbridger.

Valance said: "I am independent of the MoD and any advice I offer [to media 
organisations] is always given in strictest confidence. However if I was faced 
with an issue where I believe someone's life was actually in danger I would 
have to think about breaking that confidence", said Air Vice-Marshal Vallance.

"As it was, I couldn't see anything in the Guardian's coverage which put lives 
directly at risk, but I understand why analysts believe that some agents may 
have been compromised [in the wider coverage]."

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has not been 
approached by either the US or UK government since publication.

Rusbridger confirmed that discussions about the risk to soldiers and Afghans 
as a result of publication were part of the investigation from the beginning.

"We had a lot of discussion about that. Our starting point was that we were 
not going to just put things out there. The alternative was just a gigantic 
dump of raw information. I think that what we have done is a good thing, not a 
bad thing. We were very careful to do our best to put it in context, treat it 
with caution. If you read the coverage, particularly Declan Walsh's piece, you 
can see that there was real scepticism about the quality of some of that 
information. We were very careful to vet everything we published, using advice 
from regional specialists. We also tried to influence Julian Assange to redact 
names."

He said the fear of injunction should the Guardian approach any government 
agency or committee before publication meant that such an approach was out of 
the question.

"We satisfied ourselves that that we hadn't broken our own internal rules in 
the way we handled these documents. We generally don't identify serving 
intelligence operatives or their contacts, although you can never say never. I 
don't believe we have ever done so."

In fact that convention, however strongly embedded in the Guardian's approach 
to journalism, is not part of its editorial code of conduct although that code 
is currently under review. "Maybe we should codify it," said Rusbridger.

Isn't it arrogant for an editor to think that he or she is in a position to 
decide what would cause harm and what wouldn't? Rusbridger said:

"In the end you weigh up what you believe to be public good against public 
harm, you try to minimise the harm by highlighting public material of most 
public interest. You have a discussion about whether journalists should make 
those decisions but what it comes down to is whether you believe in the fourth 
estate.
Alternatively you leave these decisions to be taken by elected officials or 
parliament but I believe that would mean that virtually no material would be 
released."

Only the next few months will reveal whether we got the balance of risk right. 
Professionally there is no evidence that the reporters were other than 
scrupulous in minimising the risk. There may still be a risk, but when 
challenging authority, which has been the basis of the best Guardian journalism 
for nearly 190 years, you can't ask its leave to do so.

• This article was amended on 10 August 2010. The original referred to the 
Wikileaks documents' rating as "classified" in the UK. This has been corrected.

 