
Five options on your Ucas form can mean five trips – or even more – to 
far-flung parts of the country before you decide which university to opt for. 
So is trekking to multiple open days worth all the time, effort and expense? 

"It's crucial to visit as many institutions as possible," says Karen 
Richardson, head of student recruitment at Bishop Grosseteste University. 
"There's so much to gain from a visit that prospectuses and websites can't tell 
you. The student voice, which is usually very apparent at open days, is the 
key: the students' honest approach and perspective is valuable, and something a 
member of staff often can't put across in a genuine manner."

Kieron Broadhead, head of marketing and recruitment at Goldsmiths, University 
of London, agrees: "By attending open days, students are able to make direct 
comparisons between each institution. University fairs offer only a handful of 
staff, who aren't always equipped to answer every question. An open day allows 
students to speak with course leaders and [discuss] accommodation, careers and 
finance."

When you book a holiday, you don't just look on the hotel's website, so why do 
the same when looking for a university course? Prospectuses and official 
websites are there to promote the specific institution – but you can find a 
more balanced view on other sites and apps. Facebook and Twitter are good 
places to start: just search for your course or institution to find current 
students to grill about what the halls of residence or lecturers are really 
like.

Patricia Obawole, in her second year of a law degree at Bournemouth 
University, is one of many to recommendThe Student Room 
<http://www.thestudentroom.co.uk/> . "It's a forum that allows you to ask any 
question, from things about specific universities and being a student, to how 
everyone else found the exam you took," she says. "I'd advise you to use it to 
check out the accommodation. You'd be surprised how many people overlook this 
large subject and end up living in 'the halls from hell'."

If you want a taster of potential lectures, you'll find more than just music 
on iTunes: a lot of universities now offer free podcasts of lectures and 
tutorials on iTunes U. There are also plenty of "day in the life of a student" 
videos on YouTube – most are made by universities, such as this one by anOxford 
college <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CDIb6G-9N3g> , but they can be great 
for giving a feel for undergraduate life.

However, nothing beats an open-day visit, says second-year Kingston University 
law student Karline Zuravlova. "Whatever the internet photos are like, you 
could arrive at a place and hate it, and you have to spend three or four years 
of your life there. Personal visits and face-to-face meetings are best."

See what's out there

Aaron Hemsley, 19, went to open days at Kent, Reading and Sheffield, before 
choosing Lancaster University, more than 300 miles from where he lives. It was 
his instant feeling of being "at home" that made all the difference for him.

"Everything, from the layout to the way I was welcomed – it just felt right," 
he explains. "Choosing a university is a major financial decision, so 
league-table position and location are becoming more important. But I still 
think you need to feel that a university is right for you, in your heart as 
well as in your head."

Staff who went out of their way to answer questions about her chosen course 
made Glyndw^r University a no-brainer for 18-year-old Stephanie Warren, from 
Essex, who travelled across the UK to visit it. "The thing that really sold it 
was the friendliness of everybody," she recalls. "Compared to some I've 
attended, where you just feel like a figure in a sea of thousands of people, 
this was totally different."

Discovering the reality behind the glossy prospectus is another major plus of 
visiting a university, says Charlotte Humphrey, 20, who has just finished her 
second year at Bournemouth University. "Pictures can't show you the uni vibe," 
she says. "I remember going to the Bournemouth open day and thinking, wow! I 
loved the atmosphere, the hustle and bustle, the canteens, the coffee shops. 
And seeing the halls is definitely better in person than in the pictures, which 
make them look better than they really are!"

Parents, too, feel reassured by their offspring seeing the place where they 
may be spending the next three years – though some warn that deep pockets may 
be needed. "As a single parent, money has been tight, but I felt it was 
important for her to go," says Olivia Greenaway, whose daughter is just about 
to start her second year at university. "All her choices were – deliberately! – 
miles from home, so on two of the four trips it involved a hotel stay and cost 
quite a bit; about £500, including meals. In the grand scheme of things, I 
don't think that's expensive. The upside of visiting a uni is to see for 
yourself how different it is from school. Certainly it inspired her and she had 
something concrete to aim for."

Universities that are situated far from major urban centres, such as Trinity 
St David in mid-Wales, may help students with the cost of travelling to an open 
day because "for smaller unis that are out of the way, a visit really is the 
only way to truly appreciate what's on offer", says Melanie Jones, the 
university's senior recruitment officer. "We do a lot to tempt students to open 
days, and offer to pay for overnight accommodation or give students £25 towards 
travel costs if they're making a trip of 100 miles or more, because those who 
visit tend to love what they see."

Although young people may resist, there can be a role for parents in 
accompanying their children as they test-fly the nest, notes Nicky Venning. "It 
depends on the child, but most are leaving home for the first time and don't 
always know what to look out for. My eldest nearly condemned Cardiff as the 
hall of residence on view on the open day was ghastly. She then accepted the 
place and ended up in another, lovely hall. Left to her own devices, she 
wouldn't have thought to look at the other halls – I was able to gently suggest 
that there would be more than one!"

Go online

When you book a holiday, you don't just look on the hotel's website, so why do 
the same when looking for a university course? Prospectuses and official 
websites are there to promote the specific institution – but you can find a 
more balanced view on other sites and apps. Facebook and Twitter are good 
places to start: just search for your course or institution to find current 
students to grill about what the halls of residence or lecturers are really 
like.

Patricia Obawole, in her second year of a law degree at Bournemouth 
University, is one of many to recommendThe Student Room 
<http://www.thestudentroom.co.uk/> . "It's a forum that allows you to ask any 
question, from things about specific universities and being a student, to how 
everyone else found the exam you took," she says. "I'd advise you to use it to 
check out the accommodation. You'd be surprised how many people overlook this 
large subject and end up living in 'the halls from hell'."

If you want a taster of potential lectures, you'll find more than just music 
on iTunes: a lot of universities now offer free podcasts of lectures and 
tutorials on iTunes U. There are also plenty of "day in the life of a student" 
videos on YouTube – most are made by universities, such as this one by anOxford 
college <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CDIb6G-9N3g> , but they can be great 
for giving a feel for undergraduate life.

However, nothing beats an open-day visit, says second-year Kingston University 
law student Karline Zuravlova. "Whatever the internet photos are like, you 
could arrive at a place and hate it, and you have to spend three or four years 
of your life there. Personal visits and face-to-face meetings are best."

Visiting was the key
 Greg McClarnon, 22, is a third-year business studies student at the 
University of Hertfordshire. Photograph: Pete Stevens 
It was the open day that helped me to make up my mind about where I wanted to 
study. I went around a few campuses – including Surrey and Kent – before 
deciding that Hertfordshire was my first choice.

Course talks provided an overview of the areas we'd cover as part of the 
syllabus and of what we'd be expected to do during our placement year. But, for 
me, the open day was really useful because – as well as finding out about the 
academic side of things – it gave me a chance to make sure there were 
extracurricular activities available in my areas of interest.

When I visited the student-run stalls to find out about clubs and societies, I 
got talking to a member of the entrepreneurs' committee. He told me about the 
business competitions and networks that the university ran. This was a huge 
attraction for me because I'd recently started my own business, Splaat Media, 
which offers photography services to schools that are putting on drama 
performances.

After going on a campus tour, during which I had a chance to look at the 
student halls and get a sense of what the facilities were like, I knew 
Hertfordshire was right for me.
 