
Scientists attempting to grow human organs inside pigs will have to overcome 
significant hurdles before transplants can take place, geneticists have warned.

In a Panorama documentary showing on BBC1 on Monday night, researchers at the 
University of California, Davis, reveal how they have injected human stem cells 
into pig embryos to explore the possibility of growing a human pancreas inside 
a pig. The research could help to solve the current shortage of organs for 
transplant – a situation that, according to the NHS, leads to around three 
deaths a day in the UK.

“I think this is exciting because it is a sensible, practical application of 
revolutionary new science in the form of induced pluripotential stem cells and 
gene editing and I think it is very exciting to bring them together, saidSir 
John Burn, professor of clinical genetics at Newcastle University. “But I also 
know it is a long way from exciting ideas to the clinic.”

Scientists attempting to harvest human organs in pigs create human-pig embryo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/05/organ-research-scientists-combine-human-stem-cells-and-pig-dna>
The research into pig embryos is not the first attempt to create chimeras. 
Among the previous experiments, scientists using different techniques were able 
to produce amouse with a rat’s pancreas 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20813264> and mice with livers almost 
completely composed of human cells 
<https://www.salk.edu/insidesalk/articlenph.php?id=168>.

But this time, researchers are hoping that their approach will eventually lead 
to the possibility of growing human organs suitable for transplant.

To create the “chimeric” embryos, the scientists used a gene-editing technique 
known asCrispr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/10/crispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease>
 to knock out a section of the pig’s DNA necessary for the embryo to develop a 
pancreas. They then injected human induced pluripotent (iPS) stem cells into 
the pig embryo. These are cells that have the potential to develop into any 
tissue type in the resulting foetus. Although genetically foreign, they are not 
rejected by the pig embryo because its immune system has not yet developed.

The human cells would be expected to follow the chemical cues from the pig 
embryo to develop into different tissues in the foetus. In most cases, they are 
outcompeted by the pig embryo’s own cells but in the case of the pancreas there 
are no pig cells to compete with. Hence the embryo goes on to develop a 
pancreas derived from the injected human cells. After 28 days, the experiment 
is terminated and the scientists investigate the tissue to see how the embryo 
is developing and explore what the human cells are up to.

“You are basically creating a vacuum, a hole, so that the human cells respond 
to the right cues; they make a pancreas. The pig cells can’t. But what we don’t 
know, and this is what they need to look at, is whether the human cells can 
also contribute substantially to other tissues, and particularly they are 
worried about the brain,” said Robin Lovell-Badge, a geneticist at theFrancis 
Crick Institute <https://www.crick.ac.uk/> in London.

It was reported earlier this year that scientists had begun attempts to create 
the embryos, but in September last year, theUS National Institutes of Health 
<https://www.nih.gov/> said it would not back research into “chimeras” produced 
from embryos until it knew more about the implications. It cited fears that the 
presence of human cells could affect an animal’s brain and behaviour, 
potentially making it more human.

Human-pig embryos Q&A: how would 'chimeras' make transplant organs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/06/human-pig-embryos-qa-chimeras-transplant-organs-scientists>
Pablo Ross, the reproductive biologist from the University of California, 
Davis, who is leading the research, sought to calm those fears, saying there 
was a “very low potential for a human brain to grow”.

“Our hope is that this pig embryo will develop normally, but the pancreas will 
be made almost exclusively out of human cells and could be compatible with a 
patient for transplantation,” he said.

Lovell-Badge added that there were other problems to consider. While the 
researchers hope that growing human organs inside a pig using induced 
pluripotent stem cells from the human recipient could reduce the risk of organ 
rejection, there could be complications. “There are other cell types that are 
going to be present in the pancreas which come from the pig – including blood 
vessels,” said Lovell-Badge. “Those would be a big problem and they would be 
rejected by a human.” It is also possible that the surface of the human cells 
might be modified inside the pig embryo, also potentially leading to rejection.



Peter Stevenson, from Compassion in World Farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/compassion-world-farming-animal-welfare>
, told the BBC’s Panorama programme: “I’m nervous about opening up a new source 
of animal suffering. Let’s first get many more people to donate organs. “If 
there is still a shortage after that, we can consider using pigs, but on the 
basis that we eat less meat so that there is no overall increase in the number 
of pigs being used for human purposes.”

George Church, professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School, who has led 
similar research into the possible use of chimeras, told the broadcaster: “It 
opens up the possibility of not just transplantation from pigs to humans but 
the whole idea that a pig organ is perfectible.

“Gene editing could ensure the organs are very clean, available on demand and 
healthy, so they could be superior to human donor organs.”
 