
Taru Villas, Bentota, Sri Lanka
 A completely private getaway by the sea, on a beach with perfect weather - 
it's an archetypal dream destination. If it also happens to be inspiringly 
stylish and blessed with great service, it becomes somewhere you're tempted not 
to tell your friends about. Taru Villas is exactly that. Located just outside 
the town of Bentota and a three-hour drive from Colombo's international 
airport, it's the kind of place you can imagine staying for long enough to 
write a book.

Apart from the very tangible benefit of being affordable, Taru's convincing 
combination of style, sand and service make it worth the flight to Sri Lanka. 
But Taru Villas was discovered not by visiting sunseekers but by a cosmopolitan 
crowd from Colombo.

Nayantara Fonseka (better known as Taru) is a flamboyant creative figure in 
the Sri Lankan fashion world. For years, she and a few carloads of friends 
would make the two-and-a-half-hour trek from the city on a Friday evening to 
spend a relaxed, idyllic weekend on the coast. This became such a fixture in 
Taru's life that she pledged to take any opportunity she could to pursue her 
passion for the property and its location. One day it went up for lease - and 
that's how Taru got into the hotel business.

Even though the site itself was awkwardly long and narrow, the original 
architect had been clever with the use of space, and the buildings were 
arranged to avoid giving the impression of being in a tunnel. The villas, set 
along a single wall, are subtly oriented so that all of them face different 
directions. This ensures total privacy, and for guests it's like having your 
own house.

To this already successful establishment, Taru has brought her sense of style 
and hospitality. Taru Villas now has the colour, warmth and character that is 
so often lacking from an architect's disciplined vision. Walls painted a musty 
shade of pink are juxtaposed with plenty of white, and bright saffron yellow is 
combined with black and white (a traditional colonial Portuguese combination). 
More than anything, though, Taru Villas is a triumph of simplicity. It's not 
easy to make a place look good with very little, but that's exactly what Taru 
has done to distinguish this little bolthole on the beach. It's a blend of good 
choice of colour, interesting selection of furniture and the omnipresent 
avoidance of clutter.

The beach here reminded me more of Australia than Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/asia> - it goes on for miles, and the water 
is wild and woolly enough for some decent bodysurfing; the hotel can even lend 
you a boogie-board. At Taru Villas you can escape to one of Sri Lanka's best 
beaches. And at this price, you can go barefoot in the sand for as long as you 
like.

· Taru Villas, Bentota, Sri Lanka (tel: +94 034 2275618; email: 
taprobana@taruvillas.com <mailto:taprobana@taruvillas.com>). Room rates from 
US$91 (£49).

 Ibrik, Bangkok, Thailand
 An ibrik is a small container for pouring coffee. It's also the smallest 
urban Hip Hotel in Asia, with three rooms and a café on the banks of Bangkok's 
Chao Phraya River. Three rooms hardly seem worth the effort - for the 
proprietor, that is. But for the guest it's a fantastic opportunity to 
experience the hustle and bustle of Bangkok without feeling like one of 
thousands of farang (foreign) tourists.

Ibrik's guestrooms are spacious and decorated in a modern, "look what I 
managed to do with my family hand- me-downs" kind of way. They are also 
immaculately tidy and contemporary, especially in the bathroom department. It's 
like staying with a cool friend on the river. The only other accommodation 
options on the Chao Phraya consist of expensive institutional hotels such as 
the Oriental; these may indulge you with four-star luxury but cannot match 
Ibrik for raw, full-on authenticity. The sheer magic of Ibrik is you can sit on 
your terrace, which is literally hanging over the river, and watch this 
fascinating city go by - without the claustrophobic feeling of being trapped in 
your hotel room.

As might be expected of such an original inn, Ibrik is not a product of hotel 
culture. It was the idea of three young, like-minded creative types who could 
see a complete lack of smaller, more colourful places to stay in this Asian 
metropolis. Gobe Bunnag is a professional photographer, and the house that is 
now Ibrik used to belong to friends of hers. When the building came on the 
market, she and her partners saw their window of opportunity. The interesting 
thing is that Ibrik doesn't feel like a three-room hotel at all. Perhaps it's 
the professional way it's run, or the fact that the rooms are so far apart, or 
the manner in which the café co-exists seamlessly with the accommodation. In 
fact, it feels more like a hotel with 20 rooms, and yet you have the distinct 
advantage of knowing that you'll never have to share the common areas with more 
than five other people.

· Ibrik Resort, Bangkoknoi, Bangkok, Thailand (+66 02 848 9220, email: 
info@ibrikresort.com <mailto:info@ibrikresort.com>). Room rates from Baht 3,200 
(£46).

The Apsara, Luang Prabang, Laos
 From a traveller's point of view, it's hard to think of a destination with 
more to offer. Flanked by mountainous limestone cliffs shrouded in mist, Luang 
Prabang is built on a peninsula defined by the Mekong River on one side and its 
tributary, the Khan River, on the other. The surrounding area is still pristine 
in its sparsely inhabited agrarian purity, and just outside of town you will 
come across Lao hill tribes.

For those with enough time on their hands, the journey by car to Vientiane 
takes you through a slice of Asia most people will never see: a countryside of 
waterfalls, rice paddies and customs unchanged by the march of modernity. It 
was by way of such a drive that Ivan Scholte first ended up in Luang Prabang. A 
British expat who has been living in Asia for almost two decades, his ambition 
was to own a hotel and restaurant, and it was his discovery of Luang Prabang in 
2000 that finally cemented his resolve.

At the time there were no direct flights, and visitors consisted mainly of 
backpackers. There were only two upmarket hotels in town and just one upmarket 
restaurant (serving French cuisine). Attracted by Luang Prabang's size, 
sensuality and sophistication, Scholte took over an existing guesthouse and 
proceeded to transform it into a hotel to match his vision. The result is The 
Apsara, named after the heavenly maidens carved into the gallery walls of 
Cambodia's Angkor Wat. The hotel has introduced a simple but street-wise 
sophistication to the town's accommodation options. Scholte brought interior 
designer Niki Fairchild in from Bangkok to assist him with the design, and what 
they've come up with ranks as the most chic place in town. Both the restaurant 
and the rooms reflect a refined sense of taste. The restaurant, for instance, 
features a polished concrete floor, Chinese-style lanterns hung in 
multicoloured clusters, a pair of sculptural Burmese offering boxes and a 
handful of specially commissioned Thai paintings.

The rooms all have views of the river below from their colonial terraces and 
it's extremely affordable, but the best thing about the Apsara is that it is 
smack bang in the middle of town. All the cafès, temples and shops are within 
easy walking distance, and if you're up at 6am you can witness Luang Prabang's 
monks form a snaking, mile-long, saffron-coloured queue as they go about 
collecting their daily alms. It's one of the few places in Asia, if not the 
world, where the town in which you're staying is the reason for spending time 
there.

· The Aspara, Luang Prabang, Laos (+856 071 212 420, email: info@theaspara.com 
<mailto:info@theaspara.com>). Room rates from US$55 (£30).

FCC, Siem Reap, Cambodia
 Now is the time to travel to Cambodia to experience Angkor Wat. The adjacent 
town of Siem Reap is still small, pretty and unspoilt, the nearby international 
airport is only an hour's flight from Bangkok and, better still, the monuments 
are not yet overwhelmed by tourists. Plus, just as importantly, visitors have 
some interesting choices of accommodation.

FCC is for travellers who like their colonial atmosphere pared down and 
contemporary. Set in the grounds of a former French governer's holiday home, it 
combines a shuttered two-storey structure typical of French Indochina with 
modern bungalows that face either the park or the pool. Polished con crete 
floors, the odd fifties- inspired rattan chair, open-plan bathrooms and 
splashes of Cambodian silk constitute the decorative picture. Simple and coolly 
confident, FCC's interiors and bold geometric architecture make for an 
unexpectedly attractive package. Central to the hotel is the original French 
colonial building, which now houses a restaurant, a shop and a couple of bars.

For travellers, the most tangible benefit of the new, politically stable 
Cambodia is that the complex of Angkor is once again open to visitors. It's 
evident from the building activity on the outskirts of Siem Reap that the 
government is confident that Angkor will flourish as a destination. While 
that's good news for the Cambodian economy, it spells the end of any chance of 
having the ruins to yourself. At the moment, though, it's still possible to 
wander around some of the temples in relative peace. Consider, for instance, Ta 
Prohm, the site that for many visitors leaves the strongest impression. It's a 
place of fantasy that brings out the Indiana Jones in us all: overgrown by 
forest and entangled with the gigantic, octopus-like roots of the kapok tree, 
Ta Prohm provides an insight into what Frenchman Henri Mouhot and other 
explorers must have felt when they first stumbled on to the remains of the 
capital of what was once the mightiest empire in Southeast Asia. Here you are 
free to discover the ruins on your own, without guides, cassettes or roped-off 
areas.

At night, the scene transfers back to town. Aside from FCC's colonial charm 
and avant- garde architecture, it's one of the best hangouts in Siem Reap. 
There's an outdoor bar with a collection of art deco armchairs of the kind that 
used to furnish every hall of commerce in the time of Chairman Mao; and 
upstairs there are two restaurants under a formidable installation of ceiling 
fans, where you can eat while watching the town's traffic of motorised 
rickshaws going back and forth. From a historical, psychological and financial 
point of view, FCC is an interesting approach to a hotel. The atmosphere 
recalls a colonial setting, the style is confidently contemporary and the 
prices belong to a forgotten era.

· FCC Angkor, Siem Reap (tel: +855 063 760 280; email: angkor@fcccambodia.com 
<mailto:angkor@fcccambodia.com>). Room rates from $90 (£48).

Cheong Fatt Tze, Penang, Malaysia
 When Cheong Fatt Tze arrived in the Straits from Guandong province in China 
in 1856, he was barely 16 and penniless. By the time he passed away in 1916 at 
the age of 76, he had amassed one of the greatest fortunes in the Orient.

With great wealth came great spoils. Cheong had eight wives and many more 
houses, but his favourite residence was the mansion he built on the island of 
Penang, in the bustling trading port of George Town.

The so-called Blue House (due to its distinctive indigo-painted exterior) was 
purpose-built to show off his financial prowess. It was flamboyantly 
extravagant, with 38 rooms, five courtyards, seven stair cases and - to counter 
the heat - 220 windows. It also reflected Cheong's multicultural personality. 
The layout was essentially Chinese, with strict adherence to the discipline of 
feng shui; but the detail was engagingly eclectic, with ceramic floor tiles 
from Stoke-on-Trent, Scottish cast-iron balustrading, French Art Nouveau 
stained glass windows, Chinese cut-and-paste porcelain, and Gothic louvred teak 
windows.

But by the time local architect Laurence Loh and his wife Lim discovered it, a 
total of 35 different families were living in the once magnificent mansion. Six 
decades after the Rockefeller of the East had passed away, Cheong Fatt Tze's 
beautiful house had become a lowly tenement.

Luckily for Penang, the story of the Blue House has a happy ending. When the 
last of Cheong's sons passed away, Loh and a small syndicate were able to buy 
what was left of the house, and set about the monumental task of restoring it 
to its former glory.

But the best thing about the restoration is that, as a guest, you can once 
more admire the flair and extravagance of one of the Orient's most flamboyant 
houses, and you don't need an invitation to stay here. Better still, you pay a 
lot less than Cheong Fatt Tze would have been happy with.

· Cheong Fatt Tze Mansion, George Town, Penang, Malaysia (tel: +60 4262 5006; 
email:cftm@tm.net.my <mailto:cftm@tm.net.my>). Room rates form Ringgit 250 
(£36).

· This is an edited extract from Hip Hotels: Orient by Herbert Ypma, published 
by Thames & Hudson on April 11 at £18.95.

Bangkok's original hip hotel
 