
The government is banking on a rush by Britain’s pensioners to cash in their 
existing annuities following new freedoms announced in the budget.

George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> confirmed 
that from April 2016 he will give 5 million pensioners access to their annuity. 
Until now, pensioners locked into an annuity have only been able to exit by 
paying a tax charge of at least 55%. But annuities have been deeply unpopular 
following a fall in interest rates and because of the fact that when a 
pensioner dies, the annuity dies with them, rather than going into their estate.

The chancellor said: “For many an annuity is the right product, but for some 
it makes sense to access their annuity now. So we’re changing the law to make 
that possible. From next year the punitive tax charge of at least 55% will be 
abolished. Tax will be applied only at the marginal rate. And we’ll consult to 
ensure pensioners get the right guidance and advice.”

Documents released after the budget speech reveal that the Treasury is 
expecting to raise around £1bn from the move as pensioners sell their annuities 
and pay tax on the cash lump sum they receive.Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> expert Tom McPhail of Hargreaves 
Lansdown said the projection of a £1bn tax take equates to 250,000 people 
selling out over the next two years, based on the fact that the average annuity 
in the UK is only around £20,000.

“That’s quite a lot of people and they are assuming they will make quite a lot 
of money from it. That is surprising when you consider that it may not even get 
off the ground at all, and if it does, the Treasury itself has acknowledged it 
will not be suitable for most people. Yet they assume 5% of the number of 
people who have ever bought annuities will sell them.”

The decision to allow pensioners freedom to access their annuities comes a 
year after Osborne’s 2014 budget bombshell, when he said that savers in pension 
schemes will not in future be required to buy an annuity, and can in effect do 
what they like with their money. That reform is also expected to bring a 
£1.2bn-a-year boost to the Treasury’s coffers, as savers choose to cash in 
their pension pots and pay a one-off tax charge.

Many pension experts remain puzzled about how the market for selling annuities 
will work. Nigel Bolton, a partner at law firm Irwin Mitchell, said: “I have 
real concerns over the timescale of this implementation for the pensions 
industry. Trustees of occupational schemes and employers are already dealing 
with auto-enrolment changes and are struggling to deal with last year’s 
announcements on pension freedoms and choice changes. The industry now needs 
time to settle down, and not be stressed even more with further changes.”

Most existing pensioners will be more focused on how much their annuity will 
sell for – and the industry is in deep disagreement about whether it will be 
good value. Figures from Fidelity Worldwide Investment suggest that a £100,000 
pension pot that was used by a 65-year-old to buy a £7,000-a-year annuity 10 
years ago would sell for around £48,000 today. In other words, the 
now-75-year-old is giving up their £7,000-a-year income for just £48,000, which 
may not sound like a good deal, given that they may easily live another 10 
years or more.

However, others reckon that for the recently retired, selling up could be 
attractive. According to actuaries Hymans Robertson, annuitants who bought five 
years back could get back as much as they put in, despite having drawn an 
income for those five years.

It estimates that someone who used their £50,000 in savings to take out an 
annuity five years ago when they were 65 would have been given an income of 
£3,600 a year – so they would have had £18,000 in payments so far. It then 
reckons the now-70-year-old would be able to sell it for £58,900 – ie leaving 
them with £8,900 more than they had five years earlier, despite taking the 
income.

The chancellor promised guidance and advice for existing pensioners, but there 
are concerns about consumer protection, and how the market will operate. 
Prospective purchasers of an annuity are likely to require intrusive medical 
evidence to assess a person’s longevity before they are willing to make a 
purchase.

Meanwhile, pensioners in their 70s and 80s will face having to take complex 
investment decsions. Mark Abbs, a senior tax partner at accountants Blick 
Rothenberg, said: “There are great dangers from the vulnerable who will not be 
prepared for or understand the investment decisions they now need to take for 
what could be a life-changing decision. We need to provide adequate support and 
controls to help those who need it.”
 