
The role of people who have grown up with a brother or sister who has a 
lifelong learning disability or autism is rarely acknowledged.

Adult siblings often advocate and care for their brothers and sisters while 
also juggling support for their elderly parents, their own children, and their 
work. Many have always come second to another person and, with no contact with 
others who share their experience, are vulnerable to isolation, anxiety and 
depression.

A year ago Sibs <https://www.sibs.org.uk/>, the only charity in the UK 
representing the needs of siblings of disabled children and adults, began 
developing volunteer-led peer support groups across the country for adult 
siblings of people with a lifelong learning disability or autism. Creating the 
network was a response to requests from adult siblings who wanted to meet with 
peers in a safe, supportive setting. Developing such a network also supports 
Sibs’ key aim to tackle the well being and isolation of siblings.

Charity highlights role of siblings in supporting adults with a disability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/26/charity-siblings-adults-disability-sibs>
With cuts to welfare and support services, this kind of support is vital; 
siblings might be concerned about the impact of cuts to provision on their own 
life or on that of their brother or sister. Many struggle to cope with 
emotional issues such as guilt, bereavement and worry about the future. 


Since January, Sibs has supported four pilot groups – in London, Brighton, 
Nottingham and Birmingham. Each group is run by people who are siblings 
themselves and have been trained by Sibs to facilitate the support meetings. At 
the end of September, the network had reached almost 50 people through these 
initial groups. Our next training day in November will enable us to support 
more people to establish groups around the UK.

Sibs has developed some important practice when it comes to rolling out this 
UK-wide voluntary network.

Our first step was to define the network’s purpose and its relationship to 
Sibs centrally. Sibs is the “parent” UK-wide charity, with individual groups 
following our principles outlined in a charter. The groups’ aim is to improve 
siblings’ well being and resilience. The goal is also to empower people to be 
advocates for their brothers and sisters, support them in moving to more 
involved roles as their parents age, and to give siblings a voice within care 
services.

To find facilitators to run the new groups, we approached people who had 
contacted Sibs and expressed an interest in peer support. We discussed what the 
voluntary role might involve. In-depth telephone consultations enabled both 
Sibs and potential organisers to decide if they were right for the role.

Next, we held a training day, offering step-by-step details on establishing 
and running a group. It also covered likely topics for discussion and how to 
handle challenging situations.

We are providing ongoing telephone and email support to the facilitators, who 
have signed up to run a group for a year. A private area of our website for 
group facilitators enables them to download resources, share topic ideas or 
discuss activities.

Play puts life with a learning disability centre stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/03/up-down-man-play-learning-disability-downs-syndrome>
We maintain regular contact as the group facilitators’ feedback is vital. The 
groups operate at arms-length, but we evaluate and assess their impact via 
feedback forms.

One challenge is managing group members’ expectations; the facilitators are 
their peers and run the sessions on a voluntary basis, they are not 
professional experts. Sibs values the energy and time facilitators bring to the 
project.

In addition, working with volunteers who may have full-time jobs and a family 
or caring responsibility means progress may be gradual. While facilitators were 
trained in January, the first meetings have only recently taken place. To make 
the network sustainable, we must keep up the flow of facilitators being trained 
and supported.

Our goal over the next year is to support a total of 10 groups and extend 
beyond central and southernEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/england> to the West Country, 
north-east and north-west. Sibs’ vision is for every sibling in the UK who has 
grown up with – or is growing up with – a disabled brother or sister to have 
access to information and support about sibling issues. Although the project is 
time-consuming, it is crucial.

As a member of one group told us recently in feedback: “This is a place where 
other people understand us and where other people understand our disabled 
brothers and sisters.”

 * Monica McCaffrey is chief executive of Sibs 
Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 