
As the screenwriter of Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anonymous>, 
I've watched the reactions to the film both here in the UK and in the US with 
great interest and not a little surprise. The film-makers, myself included, 
expected controversy – one does not take on sacred cows naively – but I must 
confess that the vitriol of our critics has been impressive.

One American Ivy League professor, James Shapiro, has insinuated that our film 
is like Nazi propaganda 
<http://shake-speares-bible.com/2011/10/01/were-done-here/>. The county of 
Warwickshire allowed the Shakespeare Trust to temporarilyremove Shakespeare's 
name 
<http://www.birminghampost.net/news/2011/10/25/william-shakespeare-s-name-removed-from-signs-in-warwickshire-97319-29656741/>
 from public signs – an act of protest against our film that seems 
counter-productive; anti-Stratfordians couldn't agree more with that act.

Throughout the run-up to the film's release, I have been reminded that one 
does not take on people's livelihoods lightly.

While our little film not only does not disparage the genius of Hamlet and 
Lear, but rather honours, rightly, the genius of the work, it does challenge 
two Bard-related industries – tourism and, perhaps more provocatively, 
Shakespearean scholarship itself.

By asking drama lovers to think for themselves, we are asking them to look 
past the Shakespearean scholar (and the supposed facts on offer) standing 
between them and the plays. Of course, this is threatening. Notable, and no 
doubt brilliant, professors have made careers out of spinning the small number 
of available facts about the man from Stratford into hundreds of pages – many 
of them full of guesswork, assumption and conjecture. For example, we're all 
taught that Shakespeare had but a grammar school education from the King's New 
School in Stratford-upon-Avon. And the evidence for such a claim? There is 
none, and it is quite possible that Shakespeare never went to any school at all.

Professor Shapiro – who, incidentally, has refused to debate with me – is 
happy to tell audiences that the greatest "obstacle facing de Vere's supporters 
is that he died in 1604, before 10 or so of Shakespeare's plays were written". 
Which 10 "or so" is he referring to? Perhaps one is The Tempest, which many 
current Shakespearean scholars definitively date to 1611. But what to do with 
other scholars such as Joseph Hunter, who, in the early 19th century, dated the 
play to 1596? Similar discrepancies in date can be made with Lear, A Winter's 
Tale and pretty much every single play attributed to Shakespeare – including 
Hamlet, which is mentioned by Thomas Nashe in 1589, a full 13 years before the 
currently accepted date of the play, 1602. Presumably, we are to ignore these 
inconvenient dates (Shakespeare was only 25 in 1589). Why confuse 
impressionable minds?

One could go on pointing out the smoke and mirrors with which Shakespearean 
scholarship provide the curious reader. Why are more than a third of the plays 
set in Italy? Some scholars have suggested Shakespeare was the servant of a 
travelling nobleman on a grand tour. Not a shred of evidence exists to support 
such a theory, but it makes for a good chapter in a book. Why is the law so 
accurately portrayed in the plays? Well, one scholar suggests that, after his 
trip to Italy, young Will did a stint as a legal assistant. Again, no actual 
facts to back it up, but it does fill the pages.

Once one starts to examine the scholarship regarding Shakespeare's actual 
life, one quickly discovers there's not much there. It is less a life than, as 
Winston Churchill stated, a myth. And Shakespearean scholars do not like their 
myth-making to be challenged.
 