
However much we may claim to be curious about hat really happened in history, 
it seems we often prefer our stories about the past to follow the pattern of 
fairytales. Shakespeare understood this very well. He gave his audiencesRichard 
III <http://shakespeare.mit.edu/richardiii/full.html>, the hunchbacked wicked 
uncle, rightfully destroyed by the good avenging prince, for instance, rather 
than thecomplex politician of history 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/richard_iii_king.shtml>, 
defeated and killed by an invading opportunist. History may provide good raw 
material for drama, but it will need a bit of underlying myth if it is really 
going to stay in the imagination.

To that extent, the film Anonymous 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/143058/anonymous> – which offers a 
version of Elizabethan history obsessed with monarchy, parenthood and 
usurpation, in which the rightful heir to the English throne is wickedly kept 
from his inheritance – is only doing what costume drama has done since 
Shakespeare's time, acting out our fantasies in fancy dress while mentioning a 
few real events and actual people. But Shakespeare never went so far as to 
claim that there was no real Richard III, only a pretender using a pseudonym. 
Nor did he suggest that 1485 was a year of complete peace, during which the 
traces of the Battle of Bosworth were cynically faked by the establishment. The 
plot of Anonymous, by comparison, is based on the premise that Shakespeare 
wasn't Shakespeare. It isn't just a piece of sexed-up historical drama in the 
great Elizabethan tradition: it belongs to a much more recent mindset, that of 
the great Victorian conspiracy theories.

I say Victorian because nobody doubted that Shakespeare had written his own 
plays until the 1850s. The first claim to the contrary is Delia Bacon's article
William Shakespeare and his Plays; an Inquiry Concerning Them 
<http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?ammem/ncps:@field%28DOCID+@lit%28ABK9283-0007-3%29%29::>
, printed in Putnam's Magazine (in 1856). Bacon thought the Complete Plays 
represented a deliberate attempt to spread enlightenment, modernity and 
progress, and that rather than being the work of a single supremely talented 
showbusiness professional they must have been written by an occult committee of 
world-designing philosophers. Its leader, she hinted, could only have been Sir 
Francis Bacon, who had somehow scheduled its meetings in between his other 
duties as attorney general and his efforts to invent empirical science.

Delia Bacon died in an asylum after failing to find a single piece of evidence 
in favour of her claim, but her example has not inhibited successive waves of 
other champions, who have credited the plays to Francis Bacon alone, to 
Christopher Marlowe, to the Fifth Earl of Rutland, to the Sixth Earl of Derby, 
to the 17th Earl of Oxford, and even to Queen Elizabeth I, among many others. 
The obvious truth that Shakespeare wrote Shakespeare, sadly, is not news, and 
popular journalism since the 1850s has preferred news at all costs.

Shakespearean scholars, when they have managed to calm themselves, have 
sometimes paid reluctant tribute to the sheer determination and ingenuity which 
"anti-Stratfordian" writers have displayed, since any theory suggesting that 
the theatre professionalWilliam Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare> did not write the Shakespeare 
canon somehow has to explain why so many of his contemporaries said that he 
did, and why none of the rest ever said that he did not. Most observers, 
however, have been more impressed by the anti-Stratfordians' dogged immunity to 
documentary evidence, not only that which confirms that Shakespeare wrote his 
own plays, but that which establishes that several of the alternative 
candidates, including Oxford, were long dead before he had finished doing so. 
How did this weird cult belief that Shakespeare was a fraud ever come into 
being?

By Delia Bacon's time, the authorship controversy was an accident waiting to 
happen. In the age of Romanticism, such transcendent, quasi-religious claims 
were being made for the supreme poetic triumph of the Complete Works that it 
was becoming well-nigh impossible to imagine how any mere human being could 
have written them at all. At the same time, the popular understanding of what 
levels of literacy might have been achieved in 16th-century Stratford was still 
heavily influenced by a patriotic tradition of Shakespeare-worship which liked 
to depict the playwright as an uninstructed son of the Warwickshire soil, a 
thoroughly native genius who had out-written the world without any help from 
foreign or classical literary models. These two notions combined to persuade 
Delia Bacon and her more snobbish successors that the Folio's title page and 
preliminaries could only be part of an elaborate charade, orchestrated by some 
more elevated personage. They accordingly misread the distinctive literary 
traces of Shakespeare's solid Elizabethan grammar-school education visible 
throughout the volume as evidence that the "real" author had attended Oxford or 
Cambridge.

This misapprehension was reinforced by the 19th century's deepening sense that 
there was an absolute boundary between poetry (a disinterested manifestation of 
high culture) and live theatre (a mercenary form of vulgar entertainment). At a 
time when the theatrical dimension of Shakespeare's works was especially ill 
understood (the plays heavily cut and altered to fit the contemporary stage, 
and read by Victorian critics as sublime poems rather than as practical 
scripts), it became possible, perversely, for the fact that Shakespeare had 
been a known professional actor and man of the theatre to be cited as evidence 
that he could not have written the plays rather than as corroboration that he 
did.

The spread of conspiracy theories about Shakespeare has an international 
dimension to it. Both Hart and Bacon were Americans, and blue-blooded 
candidates for the authorship continue to find some of their most eager (and 
munificent) supporters in the United States. Members of other nationalities, 
too, have at times enjoyed the sense that they know the "real" Shakespeare 
better than do his compatriots: during the early 20th century German conspiracy 
theorists particularly favoured the Earl of Rutland, for example, though their 
French counterparts preferred the Earl of Derby, and in Austria Sigmund Freud, 
in a classic instance of the fantasies about secret aristocratic origins which 
he had identified in children, placed his own ill-informed faith in the Earl of 
Oxford.

The German director Roland Emmerich, then, has belatedly climbed on to a 
creaky Victorian bandwagon withAnonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anonymous>, a film which adopts the most 
lurid and B-movie-like variant of the theory that Oxford wrote the plays, in 
its quest to combine the commercial appeal of Shakespeare in Love with that of 
The Da Vinci Code. According to the scenario the film depicts, the Complete 
Works, especially Hamlet, encode the story of how Oxford was not only the 
secret author of the Shakespeare canon but was secretly both the son and 
subsequently the lover of Elizabeth I, and was thereby secretly the father of 
the Earl of Southampton and the unacknowledged rightful heir to the throne of 
England into the bargain.

Taken as a serious account of real history, this is so plainly daft, and so 
wildly at variance with all the copious evidence we have about Shakespeare, the 
Elizabethan theatre, Oxford, Elizabeth and Southampton alike, that it is beyond 
rational refutation. Taken as a version of one of our culture's perennially 
recurring daydreams, however – the tale of the oppressed rightful prince, 
wickedly deprived of his true heritage and recognition – it ought to give us 
serious food for thought about the ease with which fantasy, in some minds, can 
prove far more compelling than mere truth.

- Michael Dobson is director of the Shakespeare Institute at the University of 
Birmingham 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/staff/profiles/shakespeare/dobson-michael.aspx>
 