
Benedict Cumberbatch’s newest role will see him treading the boards in front 
of university students, after he accepted an appointment as a visiting fellow 
at Oxford.

Cumberbatch – whose last stage role was as Hamlet at the Barbican in London – 
will be joined by fellow actor Emma Watson and the Pet Shop Boys singer Neil 
Tennant among the11 visiting fellows at Lady Margaret Hall 
<http://www.lmh.ox.ac.uk/>, Oxford.

The college’s principal, Alan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger>, former editor-in-chief of 
the Guardian, announced the appointments on Friday.

“They are people drawn from a variety of backgrounds, callings and professions 
and we want them to form a bridge between our own academic community and the 
worlds they inhabit and represent,” Rusbridger said.

Other appointees include the former children’s laureate Malorie Blackman, the 
chief constable of Thames Valley police, Francis Habgood, director Beeban 
Kidron, musician Mark Simpson and high court judge Rabinder Singh.

The new positions are strictly part-time, however, and are intended to add to 
the cultural life of the college, according to Rusbridger, who took up his role 
as head of the college in September 2015.

“At a minimum we’d like them to drop in occasionally at college, eat with us 
and meet informally with a variety of the LMH community.

“We’d like them to do one thing a bit more structured. It could be a 
conversation or debate, a performance, a lecture or seminar, a form of outreach 
– or something we haven’t thought of. We can imagine fascinating interactions 
or collaborations between them.

“They are welcome to come and stay in college if they’d like a place 
temporarily to think or work. And some have already suggested other ways in 
which they might engage with a body of 700 incredibly smart students and tutors 
in order to stimulate their own thinking or work in progress.”

A list of possible visiting fellows was drawn up by the college’s governing 
body, and then narrowed down by a committee. Ultimately only one person 
approached by the college turned it down.

“Some of the names we announce today did not go to university. One left school 
at 16. We think we can learn much from them – and we hope they treasure their 
time with us,” Rusbridger said.

Cumberbatch studied for a BA in drama at Manchester University and has an MA 
in classical acting, while Watson has a degree from the Ivy League Brown 
University in the US.

Visiting fellowships are more commonly given to scholars and academics, 
although there are positions such as theCameron Mackintosh visiting 
professorship <http://www.stcatz.ox.ac.uk/node/244> at St Catherine’s, Oxford, 
that have been filled by luminaries such as the actors Stephen Fry, Diana Rigg 
and Patrick Stewart.

Only one of the 11 new visiting fellows is an academic: Jennifer Rohn, a cell 
biologist at University College London who is also a novelist; neurosurgeon 
Henry Marsh is another of the news fellows.

In a blogpost 
<http://www.lmh.ox.ac.uk/Academic-community/The-Principal/Hell-s-Passage/February-2016-%281%29/LMH-Visiting-Fellows-welcome!.aspx>
, Rusbridger said the idea came from his own experience as a visiting fellow at 
Nuffield College, Oxford.

“Some of those dinners were eclectic affairs. Alongside the students and 
tutors there would be bishops, bankers, spies, journalists and economists.

“Lord Nuffield, it seemed to me, was on to something: this was a way of 
enriching the life of a college and its students, and of blowing oxygen through 
the corridors.”
 