
Conventional wisdom has it that the internet is killing newspapers. Paid-for 
circulations are relentlessly down across most of the market while,according to 
last week's ABCes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/oct/28/september-abces-independent-rise>, 
free internet access is just as relentlessly up. If these two are related – as 
most people in the media industry believe they are – the road to business 
nowhere beckons as analogue (or in this case hard-copy paper) pounds are 
unavoidably swapped for digital pence.

But what of affairs over at the good ship Beacon of Hope (otherwise known as 
paywall city or News International)? Well, no one knows for certain since the 
company hasn't released much by way of useful data, but a report from the 
internet traffic analysts Nielsen last week did not make especially happy 
reading. In the three months the Times/Sunday Times paywall's been up, total 
monthly unique visitors have, according to Nielsen, dropped by more than 40% 
from over 3 million to nearer 1.7 million. And the estimate of thosegoing 
beyond the front page (free) to the paid-for delights within is just 362,000 
per month 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/oct/26/times-paywall-traffic-news-international>
. As this flatters the paywall by including anyone given access free, 
discounted, or as part of a print subscription, if it's anywhere near accurate, 
Wapping will be a worried place.

There is some upside, of course. Many of these customers are bringing new 
revenues and they are almost certainly worth more to advertisers - since more 
is known about them, as subscribers, and advertising can be more targeted and 
effective – and therefore priced more highly. And the experience of their 
cousins at BSkyB (who know a thing or two about managing a subscriber base) 
suggests there are a multitude of opportunities for News International to 
monetise its relationship with them as customers.

Unfortunately, without a huge increase in the number of subscribers, these 
revenues – nice as they are to have and more resistant as they may be to 
economic ups and downs – don't come close to recovering the substantial 
advertising revenue foregone by not being free. And then there is the loss of 
salience so keenly felt by many of the Times titles' better-known and more 
accomplished writers. They naturally want their work to be as widely available 
as possible so as to maximise its impact on the national conversation. And in 
the emerging digital world where recommendation via Twitter and Facebook is 
becoming so important, being stuck behind a paywall that most ordinary internet 
searchers simply won't cross is a lonely place to be.

So is that it, then? Are we all doomed? Well, maybe not. And something else 
that happened last week perhaps gives a clue as to where the future may lie.

Very much against the run of play, Britain saw the launch of a new, national, 
paid-for daily paper – the first for a quarter of a century.The launch of the 
Independent's 20p spin-off 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/oct/25/independent-spin-off-i-newspaper> 
i can easily be dismissed as the action of a madman with more money than sense. 
But look a little deeper and he could be on to something. If you can see 
through the blizzard of PR, i is aimed squarely at commuters. Intelligent and 
interested, available to read but with limited time.

Simon Kelner, the Independent's editor in chief, described it as a paper for 
people "daunted" by the sheer size and scale of other daily national newspaper 
offerings – including his own. But this doesn't quite get to the real point. 
His i is designed specifically to meet the needs of a particular group of 
consumers at a particular point in their day. It is in that sense perhaps 
better thought of as a "service" for people who do want news, information, 
analysis and even comment but delivered in a way that suits them when and where 
they want it. First reports, again unreliable and difficult to disentangle from 
corporate spin, do however appear to indicate thati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> has already found a following – not least 
among readers of its big sister, the Independent.

Elsewhere, there appears to be a roaring trade in newspaper apps for iPhone 
and iPad type devices. Reliable numbers are hard to come by here too, but the 
FT is reckoned to have dispensed some 400,000 and Guardian executives nearly 
fainted when over 200,000 people downloaded its iPhone app – and paid for it. 
This suggests newspaper content does appear to have commercial potential in the 
digital world if it can be delivered in ways that are tailored to consumers. I 
have the Guardian at home, but buy the Times whenever I travel into London on 
the train because it meets my needs there and then. What's more, that has 
nothing to do with whether it's available free on the web. When I'm searching 
for information online I'm doing one thing; when I'm sitting on a train or 
eating breakfast on a Sunday morning I'm doing another.

And maybe that's the point. No one ever really paid for content per se, they 
only ever paid for the whole package: the content and the manner of its 
delivery. In other words, what could be called "services". By charging for 
content on the web, News International may have gone up a blind alley; but 
there are other solutions based on paid-for services alongside paywall-free 
internet options that could make for a more durable commercial future.
 