
Watch last night's episode on iPlayer here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00m0sp9/Desperate_Romantics_Episode_3/>.

"More chamomile tea?" asked Millais, tremblingly. "I always find that settles 
my nerves when I get all fluttery and birdlike." Poor Millais. The quivering 
naïf was beginning to realise his arrangement with John and Effie Ruskin would 
entail considerably more than a lick of paint. "I find myself in a complete 
apoplexy of indecision," he spluttered, virginally, as Effie pouted in her 
shawl and would-be pimp Ruskinrubbed his impotent mitts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2009/aug/05/desperate-romantics-coast-review>
 while staring at his protégé's crotch.

As the big hand crept inexorably towards sex o'clock, the Brotherhood unzipped 
their britches and whipped out their euphemisms. With Ruskin's patronage vital 
to the group's future success, a victorious seduction would seal the deal, 
tying a lovely purple ribbon around the fraternity's plans to rock the Royal 
Academy to its foundations by being quite good at painting. Thus the 
pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (PRB) would demonstrate its support for its anxious 
young friend in the only way it knew how: by laughing in Millais's face and 
coming up with clever names for vaginas. Rossetti demanded to know whether 
Millais had entered Effie's grotto. There was talk of the awakening 
consciousness, of freeing the member rampant, and a bit where Rossetti said the 
word "beasting" so violently, it made Millais's demi-wave bounce in terror.

Later, back at the Ruskins's, Millais lay on a chaise longue with a damp 
flannel clasped to his brow. Having realised the truth behind John Ruskin's 
intentions - to divorce his wife for adultery - Effie headed him off at the 
conjugal pass by filing for an annulment on the grounds of non-consummation. 
For this she had to officially prove her virginity by allowing a man who looked 
like Captain Birds Eye to examine her with something pointy and chrome. Lovely.

Annulment duly granted, Ruskin's impotence was splashed across the front pages 
("I am ruined!") and Effie and Millais were free to free the member rampant. 
The clock bonged. It was, finally, sex o'clock. Millais gulped and clambered 
aboard Effie, his micro-nightie trembling around his girlish thighs. 
Motionless, he stared open-mouthed at her face, as if she was a sun lounger 
that had just asked him what he thought of its bustle. "Perhaps if you were to 
move a little … " Effie coaxed, desperately. The sex-penny dropped. Millais 
gasped with relief. There followed a bracing montage (mountage?) in which the 
pair went at it like naked blunderbusses, thrashing and whooping their way 
through the Joy of Victorian Sex, their buttocks clacking like castanets.

Then everything went crap-shaped. Rossetti met secretly with Ruskin. The 
asexual bastard told him he didn't like Millais any more and would Rossetti be 
interested in his patronage instead? Rossetti most certainly would. So much so, 
in fact, that the machiavellian tart encouraged Hunt to embark on a patently 
futile art pilgrimage to the holy land.

With poor Hunt off boring goats with his pseudo-religious philosophising and 
Millais and Effie busy re-enacting the battle of Waterloo with bums instead of 
guns, the coast was now clear for Rossetti to make wolf-eyes at Ruskin and his 
massive wallet.

So. With Rossetti's bad moon on the rise, what hope for the Brotherhood? Your 
predictions/fears/observations/euphemisms below, if you'd be so kind.
 