
Pakistan's top judge disqualified the country's prime minister from office on 
Tuesday, in a move likened to a "judicial dictatorship" by some commentators 
outraged that the head of government should be deposed by anything other than 
parliament.

Capping months of legal trench warfare between the government led by the 
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> People's party (PPP) and 
the judiciary, Yousuf Raza Gilani was stripped of his office by a short 
statement read out in a packed courtroom by the chief justice.

Iftikhar Chaudhry, the top judge, said Gilani had effectively not been prime 
minister since April 26 when he had been found guilty of contempt for refusing 
to comply with a supreme court order to reopen dormant fraud investigations 
against PresidentAsif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>.

At the time it was legally unclear whether Gilani could remain as prime 
minister after being found guilty and convicted – he served a token jail term 
in the courtroom which lasted barely 30 seconds.

But on Tuesday Chaudhry clarified the position, saying that as a convict 
Gilani had been disqualified as a member of parliament.

"He has also ceased to be the prime minister of Pakistan with effect from the 
same date and the office of the prime minister shall be deemed to be vacant 
accordingly," he said.

He ordered Zardari to take steps to appoint a new prime minister.

The legal drama adds to political uncertainty at a time when the government 
can ill afford to be distracted from a dizzying array of crises, including 
widespread unrest over electricity shortages and Pakistan's deeply distrustful 
relationship with the US.

"The supreme court has edged one step closer to a judicial dictatorship of 
sorts," said Cyril Almeida, a journalist. "The constitution is very clear about 
how the disqualification process is supposed to work and the court has quite 
extraordinarily brushed all of that aside and is making up new rules of the 
game as it goes along."

Last night senior PPP leaders including Zardari's 23-year-old son, met to 
discuss the crisis which had forced Zardari to cancel a trip to Russia.

But figures within the PPP and its coalition partners in parliament gave no 
indication they were prepared to try and defy the supreme court.

Instead, discussions turned to who should be appointed to succeed Gilani. 
Names in the frame include Hina Rabbani Khar, the foreign minister.

But a senior member of one of the parties allied to the PPP said Makhdoom 
Shahabuddin, minister for the textile industry, was most likely to get the job.

"This is a very difficult situation because even the constitutional experts 
and big lawyers cannot agree on whether this is legal," the senior politician 
said. "But the supreme court is an organ of state and whether what they say is 
right or wrong, we must accept it."

With its partners, the PPP has a comfortable majority in parliament, but the 
other coalition partners may seek major concessions if they are to give their 
blessing to a new prime minister.

The government is determined to become the first in Pakistan's history to see 
out a full five-year term in office, which must end by February next year, even 
if it will continue to be dogged by judicial efforts to reopen the so-called 
"Swiss letter" affair, which stretches back to the 1990s when Zardari's late 
wife, Benazir Bhutto, was in power.

The couple allegedly received kickbacks from Swiss companies and then 
laundered the cash. Although they were found guilty by a Swiss court in 2003, 
Zardari appealed and prosecutors dropped the case.

When Chaudhry ordered Gilani to ask the Swiss authorities to reopen the case 
the government refused, arguing the president enjoyed immunity as head of state.

Chaudhry's willingness to take up cases against some of Pakistan's most 
powerful people has earned him legions of fans. But his status as a legal hero 
has been undermined recently by allegations from a billionaire real estate 
tycoon called Malik Riaz who claims the chief justice's son had demanded 
millions of dollars in bribes to influence supreme court cases.

However, the ongoing controversy surrounding Chaudhry's family is likely to be 
wiped out by his decision to oust the prime minister.
 