
Pakistan's government appears to have abandoned a three-year-long standoff 
with the country's top judges over the writing of a controversial letter to 
officials in Switzerland responsible for investigating money-laundering charges 
against the president.

What is known as "the Swiss letter" has become central to a case that, 
although based on arcane legal and constitutional arguments, has already ended 
the career of one prime minister and has threatened to bring down the 
government led by thePakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> 
People's party (PPP).

The supreme court, led by an increasingly assertive and popular chief justice, 
has long demanded the government write to Switzerland to rescind a 2008 
notification that it was no longer a party to corruption charges against 
PresidentAsif Ali Zardari <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari> 
that Swiss officials had investigated.

The government has been equally insistent it would never write such a letter, 
claiming Zardari enjoys immunity as head of state. PPP loyalists have argued 
the supreme court refused to drop the issue because of the personal enmity 
between Zadari and the chief justice, Iftikhar Chaudhry.

In June former prime minister Yousaf Raza Gilani was forced to step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/19/pakistan-prime-minister-yousuf-gilani-disqualified>
 after he was found guilty of being in contempt of court for refusing to write 
the letter.

Many observers had assumed Zardari would continue to defy the court in order 
to limp to the end of the government's term by sacrificing one prime minister 
after the next – the current incumbent, Raja Pervaiz Ashraf, is widely regarded 
as a political lightweight and has been implicated in his own separate 
corruption scandal.

But on Tuesday morning Ashraf, accompanied by senior cabinet ministers, 
arrived at the grand marble chamber of the supreme court to announce that the 
law minister had been "empowered" to write to the Swiss authorities.

He said he was acting "in the larger interest of the country" and added: "I 
don't want to be seen standing on the wrong side of the history."

The climbdown prompted the judges to exempt Ashraf from threatened charges of 
contempt of court, ensuring his political future for the time being.

Several legal experts predicted that any letter written to the Swiss would be 
contrived to ensure it would not trigger any further investigation of Zardari 
for the alleged laundering of tens of millions of dollars through Swiss bank 
accounts in the 1990s when Benazir Bhutto, Zardari's widow, was in power.

"Given the track record of the PPP it is certain they will not write the 
letter that the supreme court wants," said Wajih Uddin, a former chief justice 
of the Sindh provincial supreme court. "It will be sugar-coated in such a way 
that it will benefit Mr Zardari."

However, the law minister indicated he would allow the supreme court to 
approve a draft of the letter.

Other legal experts assume the government must have been assured that 
Switzerland would not reopen the case, even if formally asked to do so.
 