
Nearly 70% of Pakistan's politicians, including some of the country's 
wealthiest people, did not file tax returns last year, according to a report 
that shines a light on a longstanding problem that reaches to the top of 
society.

According to an investigation published on Wednesday, the vast majority of 
MPs, cabinet ministers and Pakistan's famously affluent president,Asif Ali 
Zardari <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>, have not paid tax 
owed to the desperately cash-strapped government.

The report, by the Centre for Investigative Reporting and the Centre for Peace 
and Development Initiatives, comes at time of deepening economic crisis in a 
country that collects just 9% of its national wealth in tax – almost matching 
Afghanistan as one of the lowest rates in the world.

Tax dodging is rife among Pakistan's 180 million population; just 2% are 
registered within the tax system but fewer actually pay it. Critics say the 
rich and powerful are some of the worst offenders and are effectively 
subsidised by the poor.

"Those who make revenue policies, run the government and collect taxes have 
not been able to set good examples for others," says the Representation Without 
Taxation report. It found 69% of national assembly members and 63% of senate 
members did not file tax returns in 2011. Although they are automatically taxed 
on their basic state salary, by failing to declare any additional wealth they 
would have been able to evade paying tax.

According to a 2009 study, the average wealth of a member of the national 
assembly was well over £500,000. Under Pakistani law, tax must be paid on 
income in excess of £3,200. With little revenue to support the national budget, 
the government has been forced to borrow huge amounts from its banks. Many 
analysts fear Pakistan's threadbare public finances are unsustainable and yet 
another bailout by foreign donors could be imminent.

The latest research, led by journalist Umar Cheema, is based on the personal 
tax numbers politicians must include on their nomination papers when standing 
for election. The figures were used to track down tax filings, most of which 
were unofficially divulged by staff within the federal board of revenue. Just 
two politicians voluntarily replied to researchers asking for their tax 
details, the report says.

According to the report, 73 members of the national assembly did not even have 
a personal tax number at the time of the last election in 2008.

In the current cabinet of 55 ministers, only 21 filed tax returns, the report 
alleged, and those who were taxed paid very little, with only 9% of national 
assembly members paying more than $6,400 (£4,000). Mushahid Hussain Sayed, a 
member of the senate, paid just 82 rupees – about 50p.

In an email to Reuters, Sayed disputed the report, saying he had paid $6. "I 
was not a senator then; my source of support was from my family's agricultural 
income and lecture honoraria," he said.

Zardari did not file a tax return in 2011, according to the database of 
Pakistan's tax collectors, although the report said his spokesman insisted he 
had.

Many parliamentarians are feudal landlords who own vast estates giving them 
huge incomes and armies of workers who vote for them. However, income from 
agricultural production is tax exempt.

The government plans to launch an amnesty allowing tax evaders to register 
their untaxed wealth by paying a flat penalty of up to £380. Although it will 
cost the state millions of pounds in lost revenue, officials think it will reel 
more people into the tax net.

Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> has long struggled with 
tax evasion by the rich and powerful. In a 1986 speech, Zia-ul-Haq, the former 
military dictator, said if Islamic law called for the amputation of the hands 
of thieves, tax evaders should have their entire arm cut off. But, as the 
report notes, Zia failed to file a tax return between 1960 and 1988.
 