
A politician who is under investigation for fraud and presided over the 
collapse of Pakistan's electricity supplies was elected the country's prime 
minister on Friday.

Capping a week of political chaos, Raja Pervaiz Ashraf won enough votes in 
Pakistan's National Assembly to lead the government as it attempts to limp to 
the end of its term in office.

After the vote rose petals were thrown over Ashraf as he walked triumphantly 
into the chamber, greeting supporters and making his way to the seat reserved 
for the prime minister.

"I will do my best to make sure I live up to the example set by those who have 
come before me," he said.

The successful rallying of its coalition partners to vote for Ashraf 
represented a success of sorts for the Pakistan People's party (PPP), which has 
suffered a series of setbacks in recent days. On Tuesday the country's supreme 
court disqualified Yousaf Raza Gilani as prime minister over his refusal to 
reopen fraud investigations into presidentAsif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>.

Critics of the court and its leader, the chief justice Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry, fear it is targeting the government and overreaching its 
constitutional powers. Some described Gilani's ousting as a "judicial coup".

His disqualification also meant the troubled country has not had a cabinet for 
almost a week. And it added yet another distraction to critical issues the 
government has struggled to overcome, including Taliban militancy on its 
western border and its failing relations with the US.

Then, on Thursday, an arrest warrant was issued against the PPP's preferred 
candidate to take over as head of government, Makhdoom Shahabuddin, almost as 
soon as his name had been proposed.

The involvement of the military-controlled Anti Narcotics Force in pushing for 
the warrant has raised suspicions that the army is also flexing its muscles 
against the government. The PPP hopes to become the first inPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> to complete a full five-year term 
without collapsing or being swept away by a military coup.

However the party is unlikely to enjoy a smooth ride in the months before 
March, when an election must be called.

Ashraf is likely to be embroiled in the same legal battle as Gilani if, as 
expected, the supreme court reissues its demands for the prime minister to 
pursue money laundering allegations against Zardari.

Some analysts have also questioned whether Ashraf is the right man to lead the 
party into fresh elections given his previous cabinet job as water and power 
chief coincided with crippling electricity shortages.

Severe power cuts and sweltering summer weather have triggered waves of 
violent protests and rioting. "Load shedding" – or power cuts – is likely to be 
a key issue in the election. "It is extraordinary that we have violent riots 
across the Punjab and we have this former power minister becoming prime 
minister when millions of people are enraged by precisely that problem," said 
Mehreen Zahra-Malik, an assistant editor of The News. She said he owed his 
selection simply to his unswerving loyalty to Zardari.

"At this stage it is not about how good you are, or what you did in your 
previous tenure, but how loyal you are to the boss," she said.

Ashraf may also face legal challenges from a national anti-corruption body 
over his alleged involvement in a scandal involving kickbacks from "rental 
power plants" – private electricity companies supplying the Pakistani grid.

An investigation is already under way into the man the media has dubbed Raja 
Rental. "The candidature of Raja Pervez Ashraf for PM shows the utter contempt 
Asif Zardari has for the people of Pakistan," tweeted Imran Khan, the former 
cricketer and rising opposition politician.
 