
Luxury flats in London, hotels in Park Lane and gambling debts in Monte Carlo: 
rarely has corruption and influence-peddling inPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> been more embarrassingly laid bare 
than in the documents presented to the country's supreme court.

In page after page of official deposition, one of Pakistan's richest men 
cheerfully itemised how he bankrolled a playboy lifestyle for the son of the 
country's top judge. The young man had allegedly promised to influence his 
father's rulings.

According to the receipts set out in the 83-page document, the property 
developer Malik Riaz Hussain showered gifts and cash worth more than £2m on 
Arsalan Iftikhar Chaudhry, a 32-year-old businessman.

His father, the chief justice, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, has long enjoyed 
hero status among many Pakistanis as the freewheeling scourge of some of the 
country's most powerful people and institutions. Now he finds himself on the 
receiving end of corruption allegations, even if so far only his son is 
directly implicated.

According to the deposition, Iftikhar promised a friend of Hussain's 
son-in-law that he had inside information about investigations launched by his 
father into Bahria Town, a private company that builds sprawling luxury housing 
estates for retired military officers and the wealthy elite.

"[Iftikhar could] manage to resolve the said cases in favour of Bahria Town … 
and on the said pretext repeatedly got favours in different shapes on one 
pretext of the other," Hussain's statement said.

Those favours are laid out in pages of paperwork that records everything spent 
during three all-expenses-paid trips to London by Iftikhar and other unnamed 
members of the chief justice's family, in the form of receipts, airline tickets 
and tenancy agreements.

On the first trip, in the summer of 2010, a three-bedroom flat was rented in 
Portman Square for a month for £40,000, and a luxury Range Rover was hired for 
transport around town.

The party made a four-day side-trip to Monte Carlo where Iftikhar gambled in 
the casino of the Hotel de Paris, losing his wealthy benefactor €10,000 
(£8,800) in cash.

Trips the following year included stays at a luxury hotel and a flat off Park 
Lane costing £4,000 a week.

During a chaotic press conference held after the court hearing, Hussain said 
the chief justice had been warned of his son's activities more than six months 
previously, but nothing was done. He warned of more revelations to follow.

"I'll disclose things that will make people realise what's happening in 
Pakistan," said Hussain. "The president tried to stop me going with this. No 
one except Allah is with me." In his affidavit, Hussain said he had been 
"blackmailed" by the chief justice's son, and said he had not made his 
revelations at the behest of either the ruling party or the army, both of which 
might have cause to damage the judge. Arsalan has denied the allegations.

Among other recent cases, Chaudhry has tried to force the prime minister, 
Yusuf Raza Gilani, to revisit dormant corruption allegations against the 
president,Asif Ali Zardari <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>
, and humiliated the all-powerful Inter-Services Intelligence military spy 
agency over election-rigging charges. The chief justice's office prevents him 
making statements outside court, meaning he has struggled to disassociate 
himself from the claims against his son. Initially he presided over the case 
himself, during which he swore on the Qur'an that he had no knowledge of his 
son's business affairs. However, he later stepped down after complaints of a 
conflict of interest.

The case has focused unprecedented attention on Hussain, a powerful 
multimillionaire said to be the 12th richest man in Pakistan, who rose from 
humble origins to control a vast property empire favoured by the military and 
who now travels around the world in a private jet emblazoned with the name 
Bahria Town 001.

In a country where public services either do not exist or are in a state of 
collapse, luxury developments that boast private fire services and manicured 
lawns are in demand from those who can afford to pay. There are Bahria 
developments in Rawalpindi, Islamabad and Lahore, the latter based on a replica 
of Trafalgar Square complete with a Nelson's Column.

One of Pakistan's anti-corruption bodies is investigating claims that much of 
the land on which Bahria Town was built was illegally "grabbed" and sold on for 
vast profit.

The court deposition suggests Hussain was disappointed that he failed to get 
rid of his legal problems through his largesse towards the chief justice's son. 
"I did not get any relief whatsoever in the [cases] pending before this august 
court, contrary to the assurances and promises made by [Iftikhar]," he said.
 