 The spectre of the organ retention scandal returned to Alder Hey hospital in 
Liverpool yesterday when the parents of a boy who died there claimed that his 
organs had been kept without their permission.
Kieran Peers, six, died at the hospital in March 2000. His organs were 
retained after a coroner's postmortem examination, despite an assurance by the 
hospital in 1999 that the retention of body parts had been suspended.

His parents, Michael and Sally Peers, from north Wales, had twice asked if any 
of Kieran's organs had been retained and were assured they had not been.

But last month they received a letter informing them that substantial material 
had been kept, including part of their son's brain, heart, trachea and 
diaphragm.

The hospital trust said a further 34 families were affected by retention of 
blocks and slides and excess tissue between February and June 2000.

Alder Hey was at the centre of a scandal in 1999 after the pathologist Dick 
van Velzen hoarded thousands of organs without the consent of parents.

Ian Cohen, a solicitor who represents Mr and Mrs Peers, said the family felt 
extremely betrayed and very angry. He claimed the hospital had learned nothing 
from the organ retention scandal.

"The family made the specific request that their son's organs should not be 
removed and they were given verbal assurances in March 2000 that this would not 
happen," he said.

They were not sure the information was correct, so they contacted the hospital 
again in May 2001.

"They were sent a letter as suring them that only wax blocks and slides were 
taken for histopathology," Mr Cohen said.

But last month the hospital realised it had made a mistake. 

Mr Cohen said the error undermined the trust which Alder Hey had begun to 
re-establish with families. "It is now going to raise doubts in a lot of 
people's minds and it will put pressure back on to the hospital," he said.

The trust said it regretted the distress caused to the family. The removal of 
Kieran's organs was a necessary part of the coroner's postmortem examination 
and was entirely different to the retention of organs for research.

"It is important to emphasise that matters were not so well understood or 
clear cut as they are now, with a framework and clear guidance from the 
retained organs commission," it said in a statement. "Coroners' postmortems 
quite rightly continued to take place during this period of time.

"A postmortem involves creating blocks and slides of tissue for examination in 
order to help determine the cause of death. This is done by order of the 
coroner."

The statement said the creation of blocks and slides often required parts of 
organs or whole organs to be removed and kept until after the funeral. It was 
an entirely different process, the statement added, from the deliberate 
retention of organs for research or other purposes without consent, for which 
Professor Van Velzen had been rightly criticised.
 