
The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> aviation 
agency will propose a new standard that requires commercial aircraft to report 
their position every 15 minutes as part of a global tracking initiative in the 
aftermath of the disappearance of a Malaysian jetliner.

The loss of Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines 
Flight MH370 last March sparked a global drive for a system that would make it 
possible to pinpoint the exact route and last location of an aircraft.

An International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) spokesman said on Tuesday 
that the standard, if adopted, could go into effect in the near term because it 
would not require new technology on planes.

ICAO members are set to discuss the proposal at a major safety conference in 
Montreal next month.
Airline industry group International Air Transport Association (IATA) promised 
to lead an industry task force last year on the issue and to voluntarily 
improve tracking while ICAO developed its standard.

In December, that industry task force recommended that airlines start tracking 
planes in at least 15 minute intervals within 12 months, but IATA itself 
balked, saying the deadline was not practical.

ICAO spokesman Anthony Philbin called the ICAO scheme a “foundational flight 
tracking standard.” The agency is developing more stringent tracking 
recommendations.

“If (member states) agree to the standard, the safety conference will also be 
asked how quickly it expects it to be implemented and if it would want ICAO to 
expedite that process,” Philbin told Reuters via email. “Once our states have 
made their views known in that regard, we’ll have a better idea of the time 
frame.”

ICAO could effectively force airlines to act because the standards it sets 
typically become regulatory requirements in its 191 member states. But the 
agency prefers to make decisions by consensus, making February’s conference 
crucial.

Many airlines already track their planes using satellite systems. An ICAO 
working paper recently noted that the majority of long-haul aircraft already 
have systems on board that can transmit their position.

But it noted that the equipment is not always turned on and that in some 
locations, including along polar routes, there are gaps in satellite coverage.

Asked if radio could be used to meet the draft standard, ICAO’s Philbin said 
voice communication could serve as a fallback for planes that do not have newer 
technology.
 