
It's not exactly what you would call sticking it to the Man, but I did save 
myself a premium rate phone call and a few bob in subscriptions by not watching 
theAudley Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> fight at 
the weekend. Boxing has its own channel now, BoxNation, where for a small fee 
you can watch pasty-faced Eastenders, or African-Americans you have never heard 
of, knocking seven bells out of each other any hour of the day or night, and 
Audley was their big attraction on Saturday night, fighting David Price for the 
British and Commonwealth heavyweight title.

As a consummate professional, I felt I ought to be among those present and set 
about accessing it, but they needed my Sky viewing card number which would have 
meant taking the card out of the digital box just as the rest of the family was 
gathered round the set for Strictly Come Dancing and those other Saturday night 
family bonding programmes that have replaced the sing-song round the piano we 
enjoyed when I was a lad – or would have had we had a piano.

Also, with a lot of these subscriptions the onus is on the subscriber to 
cancel, and I never get round to it. As a result there are direct debits on my 
bank statement that are a complete mystery to me. I really do not need my 
monthly copy of Philately and Philatelist, having given up stamp collecting 
some 50 years ago, and I could probably do without MUTV as well.

Still, if you were ever curious about what political and general world views 
underpinned the stylish midfield play of Scottish international andManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> legend Pat 
Crerand, the channel enlightened us this week. They're running a programme 
called The Football League Files, in which Jim Rosenthal looks back at the 
history of the world, much like Andrew Marr, but with more focus on United.

This week it was 1970, and Jim took us back to the aborted Apollo 13 space 
mission, on which Crerand's views were sought: "I was always interested in the 
space race because I'm a great believer we're not the only ones," said the 
elegant wing-half whose ball distribution played a big part in 
United's successes in the early 1960s. "I think there's people out there 
somewhere, and one of the reasons they don't make connection with us is because 
we're always killing each other."

Paddy added that 1970 was also notable for Ted Heath's election as prime 
minister, "which I wasn't happy about". Who knew? That was a tight election, as 
I recall, and if Crerand had made his views known at the time, he could maybe 
have swung it.

The mind was free to concentrate on such issues, with no top-flight football 
at the weekend. I hate those weekends: no Match Of The Day, no Ray Stubbs on 
ESPN with his little grey goatee beard, nothing much to laugh at at all. It is 
not even as if England are fun to watch, especially against teams like San 
Marino, where collectively they remind one of someone struggling to get into a 
packet marked "tear here" but with no proper perforations, eventually resorting 
to a pair of scissors – or Andy Carroll, in the case of England.

(Mark Lawrenson, also sporting a little grey goatee – is this some charity 
thing I have missed? – said on Football Focus that San Marino "should be in 
their own group with the Liechtensteins", who I remember as a charming couple 
who ran a small delicatessen round the corner from us.)

And so, in the absence of MOTD, to the boxing on Channel 5, who got lucky with 
their European super-middleweight title fight between James DeGale and Hadillah 
Mohoumadi. Mohoumadi is the French champion, which I gather is about as 
significant as being Albania's top crown green bowls player, but 5 promised us 
he would give DeGale a decent fight and, unusually for boxing, this was not 
just hype.

Not that the night was entirely free of the bombast fight game fans love. 
Profiled before the contest, DeGale asked: "What does the future hold for me? 
This maybe sounds big, but: Greatness." Boxers, eh, you can't help liking them.

Tyson Fury is another British boxer not greatly troubled by self-doubt, and 
Channel 5 was fortunate enough to catch him in the crowd for some inter-round 
chit-chat – or not, depending on how active m'learned friends are in the area 
of banter between boxers. Despite reminders he was "live on Channel 5", Fury 
was uninhibited in his assessment of Harrison's conqueror, David Price: "You 
see, you plumber from Liverpool, it's personal between me and you, and I'm 
going to do you some serious harm, you big stiff. They're going to need 10 
plumbers to do you up, when I've finished with you."

Less controversially, he described Harrison as "the biggest bum inside 
boxing". The commentator Dave Farrar added that the Harrison fight had lasted 
just 82 seconds. Result: another lifetime commitment sidestepped.
 