 The pathologist at the centre of the Alder Hey hospital organs scandal carried 
out a full postmortem examination on the body of a 15-year-old boy without his 
parents' consent, a medical tribunal heard today.
Despite the parents' instructions, Professor Dick van Velzen, 55, carried out 
an "extensive" examination of the teenager's organs, excluding only the brain, 
and kept fragments in the Liverpool children's hospital, the General Medical 
Council (GMC) heard.

The case emerged at a GMC fitness to practice hearing in Manchester, which is 
investigating charges of serious professional misconduct against the Dutch 
pathologist. Prof van Velzen is accused of secretly ordering the removal of 
organs from hundreds of children's bodies during the six years that he was head 
of foetal and infant pathology at Alder Hey hospital.

The hearing, in Manchester, was today shown letters of complaint sent to the 
Royal Liverpool Children's trust, which runs Alder Hey, by the parents of the 
15-year-old, referred to only as child CD.

After the teenager died at the hospital on December 7 1993, his parents, Mr 
and Mrs D, agreed to a limited postmortem examination, including a biopsy of 
his lung, but nothing more.

But the following day Prof van Velzen carried out a full examination, 
excluding only the brain, and retained fragments of the teenager's heart, 
liver, stomach, lymph nodes, kidneys and lungs at the hospital.

The GMC panel heard that in May 1994 Mrs D wrote to Hilary Rowland, then the 
hospital's chief executive, complaining that a full postmortem was carried out 
"when I clearly stated that I did not want one", and that this caused her and 
her husband "extreme distress".

The panel also heard that Prof van Velzen wrote to Mrs Rowland in July 1994, 
claiming no postmortem examination was carried out "in the classic sense".

The pathologist said he had made an incision of "no more than 7cm" and claimed 
child CD was buried with all his organs in place.

But the counsel for the GMC, led by Andrew Collender QC, claimed that this 
letter was "materially and seriously inaccurate", and that the professor did in 
fact carry out an "extensive" postmortem examination.

More than 2,000 pots containing body parts from around 850 infants were 
allegedly found at Alder Hey hospital during an inquiry into the scandal.

If found guilty the Dutch pathologist could be struck off the medical 
register. But he has chosen not to attend the hearing nor send any legal 
representation.

The GMC suspended Prof van Velzen from practising medicine in the UK four 
years ago, but that suspension expires on August 1.

The panel is due to hear evidence this week from other parents whose 
children's organs were harvested during postmortem examinations at Alder Hey.
 