
Paul Beatty is breakfasting in a Dunkin’ Donuts on New York’s Lower East Side 
and mulling over his upbringing in Los Angeles, where he was born in 1962. “My 
mother grew up in Bed-Stuy in Brooklyn. She wasn’t the happiest kid in the 
world and found some eastern religion bookstore. From then on she spent every 
day there or in the library. She’s got insane knowledge about all that stuff.” 
After she moved to Los Angeles she found a cinema “that had been showing old 
Japanese movies forever,” he says. “She would take us all to theKurosawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/mar/23/akira-kurosawa-100-google-doodle-anniversary>
 and samurai films from when we were really little – six or seven. She was 
really immersed. She went to karate club for a long time. Breaking bricks. 
Industrial bricks!” Beatty later travelled with his mother to Tokyo to watch 
sumo wrestling. “She was in her mid-to-late 40s and very small. We’d spar in 
the living room. She was into everything eastern – every religion, Thai 
kickboxing. We had to bow before entering and leaving the house. It was a 
little too much.”

It’s tempting to speculate that Beatty’s idiosyncratic home life informed his 
ambivalent, leave-me-out relationship to some of the pieties of modern American 
literature. Especially modern black American literature. (He prefers the 
descriptor “black” to “African American”.)

His fiction, at once full of finely crafted sentences and roiling with 
absurdist satire, both intensely literary and briny with experience, is an 
antidote to what he once described as “the defining characteristic of 
African-American writing: sobriety – moral, corporeal, and prosaic”. According 
to fellow writerKiese Laymon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kiese-laymon>
, his first novel,The White Boy Shuffle (1996) – a coming of age tale about a 
black man from LA who becomes a basketball superstar and messiah – with its 
“layers of odd-shaped nihilism, and so many layers of black love, black awkward 
and black fear” showed us “that we were way mushier, way weirder and way more 
brilliant than we thought”.

Beatty’s most recent novel, The Sellout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/the-sellout-by-paul-beatty-review>
, recently won the prestigious National Book Critics Circle award for fiction. 
The protagonist, known only by his surname, Me, is the weed-dealing, 
watermelon-selling son of a social scientist. His father’s death at the hands 
of local police leaves Me with little more than a bill for a drive-through 
funeral and, later, Me’s hometown of Dickens Los Angeles is wiped off the map 
by the authorities. Spurred on by an octogenarian friend, he sets out to 
resurrect Dickens, make the old man his slave, and re-institute segregation.

He ends up before the supreme court, but not before several run-ins with 
members of “that scary subset of black lycanthropic thinkers I like to refer to 
as ‘wereniggers’”. By day these middle-class intellectuals are “erudite and 
urbane, but with every lunar cycle, fiscal quarter, and tenure review” their 
hackles rise and they descend from “their ivory towers and corporate boardrooms 
to prowl the inner cities, so that they can howl at the full moon over drinks 
and mediocre blues music.”

The Sellout is a hungry, restless book about class, history and memory. It’s 
also full of savage riffs, standup-style one liners and equal opportunities 
putdowns.

In 2006, Beatty edited a hefty anthology of black American humour entitled 
Hokum, which featured, to some critics’ surprise, the likes of Sojourner Truth 
and Malcolm X. In his introduction he recalled receiving a copy of Maya 
Angelou’sI Know Why the Caged Bird Sings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/18/maya-angelou-caged-bird-review>. 
“I made it through the first couple of pages or so before a strong sense of 
doom overwhelmed me and I began to get very suspicious. I ventured another 
paragraph, growing ever-more oppressed with each maudlin passage. My lips 
thickened … For a black child like myself who was impoverished every other week 
while waiting for his mother’s bimonthly paydays, giving me a copy of that book 
was the educational equivalent of giving the prairie Indians blankets laced 
with smallpox or putting saltpeter in a sailor’s soup.”

Beatty currently teaches at Columbia University in New York where one of his 
classes – on satire – is called Too Soon or Not Soon Enough. (Its syllabus 
ranges from Aristophanes to GK Chesterton, William Styron and Percival 
Everett.) Yet he says he doesn’t like to be thought of as a comic writer, 
claiming “I don’t know anything about comedy.” He’s happy to talk about the 
impact that the comedian Richard Pryor had on him though. “I was 12 or 13 when 
I first heard his recordThat Nigger’s Crazy. It’s so fucking good, so free, 
just so smart. He’d stab himself and twist the knife. It was like Joseph Heller 
– the first time I’d seen that come from a non-white male voice. He was mocking 
shit that meant a lot to him. Something about his sensibility – and his 
vulnerability – has really stayed with me.”

For most of his 20s Beatty lived in Boston. “I had to get out of LA. I was 
really depressed. The only thing that saved me was that I had good SAT scores.” 
He headed to Boston University. “I wanted to be a psychologist. It taught me 
how to look underneath the rock; the thing we think is happening is very rarely 
the case. That’s always been really good for me. But I was always violating the 
PC codes. I wasn’t always right to be offensive, but at the same time it’s 
weird – it’s good – to know that there’s always someone out there who’s not 
offended.”

By the end of the 80s Beatty had moved to Brooklyn College, where he studied 
underAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film>. 
He first came to public attention in 1990 when he became the inaugural grand 
poetry slam champion of the Nuyorican Poets Cafe. He subsequently published two 
collections,Big Bank Take Little Bank (1991) and Joker, Joker Deuce (1994) 
which came out just as slam poetry was being hailed as a vibrant, multiracial, 
hip-hop-inflected antidote to the stuffiness and self-importance of the New 
York experimental poetry scene. Anthologies appeared; the cafe became a 
must-visit for discerning tourists; MTV dedicated a special programme to what 
it portrayed as a cross between a movement and a revolution.

At one point in Beatty’s second novel Tuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/jul/22/fiction.reviews> (2000), Winston 
Foshay – a gang member who stands for political office in Spanish Harlem – 
sneers: “‘Hip-hop community?’ Where the hell is the opera community? The 
heavy-metal community? How the hell you define people by the kind of music they 
listen to?’” Even today, thinking about slam poetry, Beatty is somewhere 
between rueful and embarrassed. “I hated being associated with all that kind of 
crap,” he remembers. “When the cafe first happened it was just a place – cold 
and dark – that people would go to to read poems. My friend Gerald said: 
they’re going to have velvet ropes around here in a month. And he was 
absolutely right. It quickly turned into a thing. Then everything became the 
same. Even getting tied into a group as a poet – I don’t think that’s what you 
want to do. They would drop the ‘integrity’ word all the time and this kind of 
crap. It scared me.”

Beatty recalls with particular distaste the MTV show on which he read aloud 
“Old Yellar dreams of days when they wasn’t just whistlin’ dixie” 
<http://www.english-slang.com/~video/u8Ei_48nQ8U>, a poem that made liberal use 
of the word “coon”. “I was there, so I’m as guilty as anyone. But I remember 
thinking. ‘Oh my God!’ All these poets want to be stars. A couple were really 
stressed about how they could best fit in. And I was like – ‘Don’t you do this 
thing, in a weird way, not to fit in? Isn’t that part of being a poet?’

He later went to Berlin with some poets from San Francisco. “Everyone was 
talking about how subversive their work is and how dangerous. I just stood up, 
and I was like – Who’s going to critique you? ‘I’m this and I’m that’. That’s 
safe. That tour was the first time I’d heard the phrase ‘spoken word poetry’. I 
thought: ‘I’m not doing that! Whatever the fuck that is!’”

Nonetheless Beatty is fascinated by speech and how individuals sculpt, amplify 
or conceal their identities through speech. He’s fond of the socially intimate 
documentaries of directors such as Frederick Wiseman and Michael Apted of the7 
Upseries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/emma-brockes-blog/2013/jan/08/michael-apted-56-up-ordinary>
. His hero is the American social and oral historian Studs Terkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/01/studs-terkel-usa>. “It starts 
withWorking [1974]. That was really formative for me. He showed me how there’s 
a tonal quality to when someone’s telling you a really good story. He’s a 
genius editor too. His books are so well crafted. I love him. Because of him I 
started getting into oral history: back-alley abortionists, kamikaze pilots who 
didn’t die, Terry Wallace’sBloods [1984] – about black Vietnam veterans.”

The Sellout by Paul Beatty review – a whirlwind satire about racial identity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/the-sellout-by-paul-beatty-review>
For Beatty, those books, in which narratives billow and swell and take all 
sorts of shapes, represent a liberating counterweight to contemporary 
storytelling. “Slam poetry, bad dance reality shows, TED talks: they’re all 
meant to be memorised. They’re for short attention spans. They put narrative 
and discourse into a box.”

Towards the end of The Sellout, Me discusses something he calls “unmitigated 
blackness”. A partial definition and pantheon follow: “Clarence Cooper, Charlie 
Parker, Richard Pryor, Maya Deren, Sun Ra, Mizoguchi, Frida Kahlo, 
black-and-white Godard, Celine, Gong Li, David Hammons, Bjork, and the Wu-Tang 
Clan in any of their hooded permutations. Unmitigated blackness is essays 
passing for fiction. It’s the realisation that there are no absolutes, except 
when there are. It’s the acceptance of contradiction not being a sin and a 
crime but a human frailty like split ends and libertarianism.”

I tell Beatty that many of the artists he lists, though they are now 
celebrated for mutating forms and transgressing genre codes, were initially 
dismissed as kooky, outliers, traitors. “Yeah,” he sighs. “They were trying to 
reshape categories and our understanding of what blackness is – of what freedom 
is. They’re all people who make you think – Oh shit: I didn’t know you could 
say that.”
 