
Rock groups had split before, and no one bar their fans really cared. But the 
parting of the Beatles? This was the first time four musicians deciding to work 
separately became worldwide news, treated almost as a death.

The end itself, though, was distinctly anticlimactic. George Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgeharrison> was actually the first of 
the Fab Four to walk, back in 1968. He was coaxed back into the fold, only for 
John Lennon to quit in the autumn of 1969. A pact of stony silence in the face 
of the public was agreed, allowing for the release of the Beatles' Abbey Road 
album in September 1969 and the continuation of other works in progress. The 
four individual Beatles drifted yet further apart, with an increasingly 
estranged McCartney retreating as far as rural Scotland.

The White Album, released in November 1968, had already felt like the work of 
four distinct creatives, rather than the world's most unassailable musical 
force. The gold-plated songwriting partnership of Lennon/McCartney had become 
unworkable, as the influence of new romantic partners, inchoate business 
affairs, power struggles and the turn of the decade all came to bear on a 
Liverpudlian quartet who had turned rock music from a frivolous teenage pursuit 
into serious cultural capital.

It fell to McCartney to wield the axe almost accidentally in the spring of 
1970. The other three had requested that McCartney delay the release of his 
debut solo album, to avoid a clash with Let It Be, the Beatles' forthcoming 
album and film. Incensed, McCartney issued a snarky Q&A communique whose 
negative content about the Beatles' future made the front page of the Daily 
Mirror on Friday 10 April, 1970. "Paul quits the Beatles," the Mirror concluded.

McCartney's parting shot was heard around the world. The Beatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> were no more, banjaxed by the 
usual worldly ills of ego and greed. The demise of the Beatles – the band that 
were arguably as big as Jesus – was felt as a global loss. And their parting 
offered proof of one of rock's great inalienable truths: the whole of a group 
is greater than the sum of its parts.

McCartney was instantly vilified. His solo album and its follow-up, Ram 
(1971), were viciously panned by critics, who only began to soften their stance 
with the arrival of Wings's Band On the Run in 1973. To this day, McCartney 
remains a zealous defender of his post-Beatles oeuvre. Having arguably 
instigated the restlessness that was the undoing of the Beatles, John Lennon 
needed therapy to recover from the end of his teenage band. The ensuing album, 
John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band, dealt in challenging and unambiguous terms with 
Lennon's troubled childhood. Unlike McCartney's efforts, it was embraced by 
fans and critics alike. In Imagine (1971), he created one of the few 
post-Beatles songs that endures in the same way as the band's own songs do. And 
the only rock news bigger and more final than the end of the Beatles was, of 
course, the death of Lennon in 1980.Ringo Starr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ringo-starr>, meanwhile, settled into the 
role of rock's court jester, drinking in LA with Keith Moon, before sobering up 
to become the voice of Thomas the Tank Engine.

In the 40 years since McCartney's act of high dudgeon, it's perhaps George 
Harrison who has emerged from the Beatles with the most gravitas. Harrison's 
triple album of 1970, All Things Must Pass, made good on the promise of his 
burgeoning songwriting on the White Album and Abbey Road; it functioned as a 
kind of repository for grief as mourners bought it in their thousands. Of all 
the Beatles, he had been the most receptive to the sounds and ideas of the 
Indian subcontinent, fusing them with sounds of the US deep south: Krishna in 
league with the sweet Lord. His Concert For Bangla Desh in 1971 was the 
forerunner of Live Aid and every major rock tin rattle since.

The end of the Beatles had, in some way, codified the failure of the dream 
of an entire generation – that music and its fans could wrest control away from 
the ancien regime and set a new agenda. The band who had sung All You Need Is 
Love to a global TV audience of an estimated 400 million people had, when push 
came to shove, feet of clay. A team from CBS News, arriving at the Beatles' 
Apple HQ at the time of McCartney's departure in 1970, said the Beatles' split 
was "an event so momentous that historians may one day view it as a landmark in 
the decline of the British Empire". It was more important than that.
 