
My friend Paul Fordham, who has died aged 90, was a strong believer in 
university adult education, and worked in this arena throughout his life.

He was born at Great Ellingham, Norfolk, the son of Gertrude (nee Ellis) and 
Robert Fordham, both schoolteachers and Quakers. Paul was educated at the 
Friends’ school, Saffron Walden, and Leeds University, where he gained a BA in 
geography.

During the second world war, he spent three years as a “Bevin boy”, 
conscripted as a coalminer. He taught first at theUniversity of Nottingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofnottingham>, then in east 
Africa, and on return to the UK became director of Southampton University’s 
adult education department. His interest in Africa was reflected initially in 
his book The Geography of African Affairs (1965), which went through four 
editions. That interest continued in various interchanges of students and staff 
with Tanzania.

Paul was a quiet innovator, for example as director of the Kikuyu College of 
Social Studies, Kenya, which offered new learning opportunities to adults, and 
in the New Communities Project in Leigh Park, Portsmouth, at one time the 
largest housing estate in Europe. Witnessing both these projects, I saw how 
Paul’s respect for others and capacity for maintaining a vision were essential 
to their progression.

In wider spheres, Paul chaired the National Institute of Adult Continuing 
Education through various crises in the early Thatcher years. Internationally, 
he was active in the Commonwealth Association for Education and Training of 
Adults and participated in several Unesco meetings. He became convinced of the 
need for much more serious attention, nationally and internationally, to adult 
literacy.

In the early 1980s, he worked on this with an international NGO and a German 
government development agency, and produced a report, One Billion Illiterates, 
One Billion Reasons for Action (1983). This publication led to the holding of 
Unesco’s first International Literacy Year in 1990.

His last job was as professor of adult and continuing education at the 
University of Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsouthampton>. After retiring 
in 1987, he founded the International Centre for Education in Development at 
the University of Warwick.

Surprisingly, Paul had time for many other interests. He loved climbing hills 
and he was a nature lover, especially excited by butterflies and fungi. A keen 
gardener, later he gave the same attention to cooking. He enjoyed visiting art 
galleries and listening to music, especially jazz.

He is survived by his wife, Ada (nee Dickens); by two sons, Edmund and Simon, 
from his first marriage, to Sheila Morgan, who predeceased him; by a 
stepdaughter, Sarah; and by five grandchildren and two step-grandchildren.
 