
Asset managers that invest trillions of savers’ money too often fail to 
challenge companies on excessive pay and bonuses, shareholder activist group 
ShareAction has said.

Blue-chip City firms, including BlackRock, HSBC’s global asset management 
division and Schroders, were found to have mostly sided with company management 
on controversial decisions over pay, which showed they were “not exercising 
their stewardship responsibilities” the NGO said.


The survey of the UK’s 33 largest asset management firms, which look after 
£13.8tn for pension savers, charities, universities, also singled out six 
investment managers for failing to be transparent.

ShareAction studied some of the biggest shareholder rebellions of the 2014 
annual general meeting season, a total of eight occasions when companies faced 
dissent from more than 30% of investors.

The biggest corporate revolt was at trenchcoat maker Burberry, when just over 
half of investors voted against the company’s remuneration report, after it 
came to light that its chief executive, Christopher Bailey, had been awarded a 
£15m share award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/11/burberry-shareholders-revolt-christian-bailey-pay-package>
 during his tenure as chief creative officer. Standard Chartered bank, the 
consumer goods conglomerate Reckitt Benckiser and drug company AstraZeneca, 
also faced rebellions, when a large minority of shareholders voted against 
executive pay deals.

The AGM is one of the main ways investors can hold to account the chief 
executive and board of listed companies, although until the “shareholder spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/17/shareholder-spring-investor-revolt-pay>
” of 2012, most meetings were sleepy affairs with little dissent.

Some asset managers, including Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement>, Hermes and M&G, 
continued this non-dissenting tradition at AGMs; the ShareAction report showed 
they sided with company boards on most controversial votes.


In contrast, Threadneedle Asset Management, Aviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> and Goldman Sachs were 
among the firms that more often voted against contentious pay awards.

The same group of activist investors also tended to support resolutions on 
environmental and social issues, such as a target for ExxonMobil to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions or an obligation on National Express to improve 
oversight of bus drivers’ conditions.

Other asset managers consistently voted against environmental and social 
resolutions, including Aberdeen Asset Management and the fund management arms 
of JP Morgan and UBS.

Catherine Howarth, the chief executive of ShareAction, said: “Our survey 
suggests a wide range of big names in asset management aren’t exercising their 
stewardship responsibilities at some of the world’s biggest companies.”


“While the detail of any one vote may not be indicative of an approach, there 
does seem to be a pattern for some managers across the votes we looked at with 
significant shareholder dissent. We expect investors will be asking tough 
questions of their asset managers, particularly those who appear to be simply 
backing management most of the time.”


“Investors should on the whole support company management. However, they 
should be willing to vote against management’s voting recommendations to 
protect the long-term interests of their clients and their beneficiaries.”


But the asset management industry body said it was undertaking stewardship and 
engaging with companies in ways beyond the AGM.

“Voting happens at the end of the process and, as the report highlights, 
investors express their views. This sometimes leads to reassurance through 
dialogue and engagement, which can result in votes in favour of board 
recommendations,” said Daniel Godfrey, chief executive of The Investment 
Association.

ShareAction also criticised six asset managers for failing to disclose their 
AGM voting record, in contravention of the industry best practice code they 
have signed. Artemis, Capital International,Invesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/invesco> Perpetual, J O Hambro Capital 
Management, Santander, and Wellington, do not disclose their AGM voting record, 
although all have signed the Stewardship Code, which includes a requirement to 
provide periodic reports on voting.

The most transparent asset managers were Aviva Investors, F&C Investments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/moneyinvestments>, Newton Investment 
Management, Royal London Asset Management and Standard Life.


Ashley Hamilton Claxton, corporate governance manager at Royal London – an 
asset manager with a track record of opposing controversial pay deals – said it 
welcomed the report. “We think stewardship is very important and we try to 
encourage good governance through our proxy votes and through conversations 
with company directors. We support the report’s call for greater transparency, 
and hope that more fund managers will disclose their voting intentions in the 
future.”

 * This article was amended on 19 May. Burberry investors rebelled against 
Christopher Bailey’s one-off payment of £15m in shares, an award which he 
received as chief creative officer but came to light after he became chief 
executive.
 