
Studying wild animals is crucial if we are to understand why they behave the 
way they do. But what if the apparently passive act of observation changes the 
way they behave? For decades, behavioural ecologists have been very mindful of 
this problem. A paper, just out inNature Methods 
<http://www.nature.com/nmeth/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nmeth.3173.html#videos>
, suggests a cunning new way to collect data from wild animals without causing 
them undue stress.

There are many ways to study the behaviour of wild animals. You can go out and 
gain their trust, hoping they get so comfortable with your presence that they 
carry on as if you weren’t there at all. Or you might want to fit your study 
population with some kind of gizmo that can collect (and maybe even transmit) 
data in your absence. But even devices like these are likely to alter 
behaviour: increasing drag, for instance.


A microchip implanted beneath the skin (as is now routinely performed for 
pets) is much more likely to go unnoticed by the animal. The snag is that in 
order to scan the chip and identify the individual, you have to get pretty 
close. Researchers have now come up with an alternative: sending in a 
remote-controlled robot equipped with a scanning device, the ability to collect 
all sorts of data on the focal animal and then transmit it into the ether. 
Testing this method out on king penguins, they reveal that it is likely to be a 
whole lot less stressful for the animals.

When approached by a human, for instance, a penguin’s heart rate increased by 
an average of 35 beats per minute. When the rover came at it, its heart rate 
also increased, but only by around 24 beats per minute. In addition, a human 
caused the target penguin to move much more (average of 43 cm) than the rover 
(just 8cm). With the robot, the penguins were also much quicker to return to 
their original physiological state.

The researchers went on to see if emperor penguins had a similarly relaxed 
reaction to robots. Many were wary. But when the scientists dressed up the 
rover as a baby penguin, everyone was happy. “Chicks and adults were even heard 
vocalizing at the camouflaged rover, and it was able to infiltrate a crèche 
without disturbance,” note Yvon Le Maho and colleagues.
 The camouflaged rover successfully infiltrates an emperor penguin crèche 
Photograph: Yvon Le Maho et al. Nature Methods 
This set-up is obviously not going to be workable in every setting. But it 
certainly does open up a lot of exciting possibilities for students of animal 
behaviour. Not to mention some rather wonderful photographic opportunities.

 