
Millions of employees should be forced to pay some of their salary into a 
workplace pension scheme, with no option to opt out, according to a 
centre-right thinktank.

Building up a pension pot "should be an obligation equivalent to paying taxes 
for public services," arguesPolicy Exchange <http://www.policyexchange.org.uk>, 
in order to prevent the state from having to "pick up the tab" later.

The thinktank has proposed a scheme dubbed Help to Save that builds on the 
automatic enrolment regime launched in October 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/oct/01/auto-enrolment-pensions-all-you-need-to-know>
. It said the average pension pot was estimated to be just £36,800, enough to 
generate a retirement income of only £1,340 a year on current annuity rates, 
but an average earner ideally needed savings closer to £240,000.

The thinktank said it supported automatic enrolment, which aims to get up to 
11 million more people saving for their retirement by putting them directly 
into a workplace pension scheme. This new system is being phased in over 
several years, with more than 2 million workers already enrolled.

However, employees are free to leave the scheme if they wish and the opt-out 
rate has been running at about 9%-10%.

Policy Exchange warned that even with 8% of earnings flowing into a pension 
scheme – the minimum contribution under automatic enrolment from 2018 – people 
would not be able to build enough for their retirement. It said there should be 
a new scheme that built on the present system but removed the opt-out, unless 
the individual could show they had accumulated enough money already.

Policy Exchange also proposes upping the total minimum contribution from 8% to 
12% by requiring a proportion of any increase in someone's pay to be allocated 
to their pension.

James Barty, author of the report, said: "With an ageing population, putting 
money aside for later life should be seen in the same context as national 
insurance contributions, taxes and even education - an obligation that falls on 
everyone in society."

However, many people would argue that they cannot afford to pay into a 
pension. The Department for Work and Pensions says that for many people, paying 
into a workplace pension is a good idea even if they have other financial 
commitments, butit suggests workers should consider opting out if their 
finances are not in good shape 
<http://www.dwp.gov.uk/docs/workplace-pensions-faq.pdf>: "If you're behind on 
your mortgage, rent, credit card or other debt payments, a pension might not be 
the right step at the moment. It's something you should come back to once your 
debts are more under control."

Steve Webb, the pensions minister, said around 10% of people were opting out, 
and that it was mostly people who were already close to retirement or had 
exhausted their lifetime limit. He added: "It is not inevitable that opt-out 
rates will soar this year [as more smaller employers join]. We watch it closely 
and we are not seeing anything different month by month."
 