
Some pension savers will inevitably head to Las Vegas and splash out on fast 
cars when new rules on cashing in retirement savings take effect in April, 
Britain’s chief financial watchdog has admitted.

Martin Wheatley, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority, also 
appeared to suggest that the new regime could risk triggering chaos when he 
said the pensions industry was facing a “Y2K moment” on 6 April – dubbed 
pension freedom day. As the 1990s ended there were widespread fears that the 
Y2K bug, also known as the millennium bug. would spark mayhem and cause 
computers around the world to crash, though these concerns proved unfounded.

The new rules abolish the requirement to convert a pension pot into an annuity 
– a product that provides an income for life – and leave people free to do 
whatever they like with their retirement cash. It means that from April, more 
than 300,000 individuals a year with defined contribution or money purchase 
pensions will be able to access them as they wish after the age of 55.

But there are fears that the industry will not be able to cope with demand and 
that insufficient advice systems are in place. Concern has already been 
expressed that some people will decide to blow their retirement savings on a 
Lamborghini or luxury holiday, and on 10 March a committee of MPs warned that
consumers were at risk of being ripped off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/10/protect-pensioners-scammers-who-want-savings-say-mps>
 by scams, mis-selling and poor decision-making.

In a speech in Edinburgh, Wheatley said there remained many unanswered 
questions about the new system, but that it would be impossible to prevent some 
people making “sub-optimal” decisions.

 “Some savers, come 55, will invariably head to Las Vegas, buy fast cars or 
otherwise calculate how to run down their pension pots in days and months 
rather than years,” he said. “Optimists will be inclined to believe that these 
numbers will be fractional. Pessimists that they may be more significant. 
Indeed, Saga seems to have suggested that cruise bookings have already risen by 
some 8% ahead of April.”

But Wheatley said the reality was that “this is all simply part of the process 
that flows from the benefit of freedom. Some responsibility, by definition, has 
to bump across from industry to customers. Otherwise you simply return to 
difficult conversations around why policymakers should, in effect, decide how 
savers draw their money.”

His comments appear to be a response to MPs on the work and pensions select 
committee, who criticised the FCA for declaring that it was impossible to “stop 
fools behaving like fools” when it came to spending pension nest eggs.

Wheatley, who was speaking at a National Association of Pension Funds 
investment conference, went on to say that everyone would be deceiving 
themselves if they imagined that there were not risks for firms and 
policymakers.

“One of the most important, for me, [is] the possibility that some customers 
in this first tranche to benefit from the new freedoms will be targeted by 
criminal enterprise. Scams and fraud, we know, tend to proliferate at the 
moment of maximum uncertainty. So, for the pension industry, the upcoming 
switch in regime looks something akin to a Y2K moment. Particularly given that 
there will be a significant number of people who have held off crystallising 
their pensions over the last year in order to take advantage of the new policy 
landscape.”

Wheatley said it was vital that this risk was properly managed and mitigated. 

There have already been predictions that pensioners could withdraw £6bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/12/pension-shakeup-6bn-withdrawn-annuities>
 within the first four months of the regime.
 