
Consumers saving for retirement in company pension schemes will have to wait 
for action against high charges eroding their funds after the government 
delayed a plan to cap fees from April.

Ministers had promised a "full frontal assult" on fees charged by workplace 
pension providers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/oct/29/pensions-minister-full-frontal-assault-rip-off-schemes-webb>
 under the auto-enrolment scheme, saying they would limit them to between 0.75% 
and 1%. However, this is being shelved until at least 2015 after coming under 
fire from the industry.

In October the pensions minister, Steve Webb, launched a consultation on 
workplace schemes, saying that a limit on annual charges was one of the ways 
the system could be made fairer for consumers.

He pointed to a report by the Office of Fair Trading "identifying no fewer 
than 18 different sorts of charges which can be taken from people's pensions". 
The Department for Work andPensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>
 (DWP) put out a consultation document setting out three options: do nothing, 
improve disclosure of pension scheme charges, or set a charge cap on the 
default fund in qualifying pension schemes which are used under automatic 
enrolment.

However, in December the regulatory policy committee declared the impact 
assessment for the change "not fit for purpose" and asked the government to 
provide more evidence that it will not damage businesses.

The introduction of the cap has now been pushed back until 2015 at the 
earliest.

A spokesperson for the DWP said: "This is an important and complex 
consultation that requires our proper consideration to ensure we get it right, 
and we will confirm a publication date in due course."

Pension provider Aegon warned that the 0.75% cap would not work for all 
schemes and urged the government to take time considering the issue.

In contrast, Legal & General said it favours the cap, and suggested that the 
planned 0.75% cap on fees is too high.

Tom McPhail, head of pensions at Hargreaves Lansdown, welcomed the delay. "In 
the meantime, we would urge the government to address the more immediate and 
serious problem of helping pension investors retiring today to convert their 
pension savings into a retirement income as effectively as possible.

"Far more value is being lost from the pension system at the point of 
retirement than would be saved through the implementation of a charge cap."

Since October 2012, workers have been gradually signed up to workplace 
pensions under auto-enrolment, such as the government-funded National 
Employment Savings Trust (Nest) scheme, unless they deliberately opt out.

Millions more employees will be brought into company pension schemes over the 
next few years.
 