
Some of Britain’s biggest pension companies are still refusing to let retirees 
withdraw cash from their retirement pots, two months after the freedoms were 
introduced.

On 6 April, people aged 55 and over were given access to their pension 
savings, allowing them to spend as they wish without facing huge charges. While 
the changes posed challenges for providers, most said savers would be able to 
take out cash lump sums on time. However, frustrated readers say they are still 
unable to do this.

Paul Dennison, 71, asked Friends Life if he could withdraw the full sum from 
his two pensions, together totalling £9,466. “I sent the application forms 
ahead of the changes, but I’ve been waiting ever since for payment without any 
communication about what the problem is, or when I might expect the cash.”

He adds: “I’ve experienced huge delays, poor access to customer services, wait 
times by phone typically over 30 minutes, and ineffective complaints 
procedures. There will be plenty of older, vulnerable people who are facing 
horrendous problems accessing their money.”

After The Observer intervened, Friends Life apologised and said it was 
processing his payment, along with compensation for his trouble. It says that 
while it will not allow savers to use their pension like a bank account to make 
regular withdrawals, savers should not face problems taking the full amount in 
cash out of their pot.

Few pension firms offer complete access to all the freedoms, says Malcolm 
McLean, senior consultant at actuaryBarnett Waddingham 
<https://www.barnett-waddingham.co.uk/>. “Many insurers have struggled with the 
timescale, and it isn’t mandatory under the new rules for providers to offer 
the full range of freedoms,” he says.

Often the only option is to switch to a rival that will allow withdrawals. 
“That’s all very well, but in some cases it costs to transfer out,” McLean 
says. Insurance giant Phoenix is also among those that will not allow savers to 
use their pension as a bank account. Some older insurance companies are unable 
to offer customers the option to withdraw chunks of cash because of the cost 
and time involved, McLean says.

Tom McPhail, pensions expert at Hargreaves Lansdown <http://www.hl.co.uk/>, 
says: “The government could bring pressure to bear on providers that aren’t 
offering these freedoms, to offer a low-cost exit mechanism for customers aged 
55 and over.”
 