
People considering selling their annuity should be given risk warnings by the 
firms involved, under proposals set out by the City regulator.

From April 2017 people who have an annuity, which gives pensioners a 
guaranteed income, will be able to sell it on for a lump sum.

Around 300,000 people are expected to take up this option, and the Financial 
Conduct Authority (FCA) has published a consultation on proposed rules around 
the new secondary annuity market.

It said that the latest pensions shakeup would give some consumers more 
flexibility, but that there were also potential risks in terms of consumers 
running out of money in retirement if they sell and people struggling to put a 
value on their annuity.

Some consumers may be particularly vulnerable because “there is a higher 
incidence of reduced mental capacity among potential annuity income sellers,” 
the consultation document said.

Under the proposed rules, firms will be required to give those considering the 
sale of their annuity specific risk warnings at the earliest opportunity, and 
to recommend they seek regulated financial advice or guidance from the 
free-to-use service Pension Wise.

The firms giving the risk warnings could be a potential buyer, a broker or an 
annuity provider, depending on who the consumer makes contact with. If 
consumers can show they have already received the risk warnings from another 
firm, they will not need to receive them a second time.

Firms will also be required to recommend that sellers shop around. The FCA has 
also proposed that annuity providers will only be able to recover “reasonable 
costs” when charging to set up sales.

It also proposes that brokers set out their charges up front and agree them 
with the consumer, rather than being paid by commission from firms acting as 
buyers.

To help consumers judge the true value of the annuity income they are planning 
to give up, the FCA proposes that buyers and brokers making an offer will be 
required to present this alongside the “replacement cost” of the annuity income 
if it were bought new on the open market.

Christopher Woolard, the FCA’s director of strategy and competition, said: 
“Opening up this market extends the government’s pensions reforms to those who 
have already bought annuities. However, there are potential risks involved for 
consumers and we recognise that some consumers may be particularly vulnerable.

“We have set out proposed rules and guidance today that will help ensure that 
consumers have an appropriate degree of protection should they decide to sell 
their annuity income.”

The FCA consultation is open until 17 June. 

Tom McPhail, the head of retirement policy at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: ““The 
FCA has come up with a good package of measures to try and protect investors, 
while also giving them the freedom to manage their own money.

“All fees and transaction costs have to be disclosed upfront. However, they 
could easily absorb 10% or more of the value of the annuity, so this may also 
put a lot of people off.”
 