
Today's graduates face a working life of around 50 years. Even then, they'll 
be lucky to get their hands on their state pension by the time they're 70.

If governments keep on raising the retirement age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/05/state-pension-age-raised-to-70-autumn-statement>
 as life expectancy increases, children born in 2050 could be 84 before they 
collect their pension, according to predictions by PricewaterhouseCoopers, and 
could expect to live to be 104. Given that life expectancy varies across the 
country, some people could be working until they die, and those in manual 
trades could find they receive just a few years of the state pension compared 
to office workers who survive much longer.

"For many, the prospect of working until 70 or 80 will be unpleasant and for 
those with manual jobs it might be a physical impossibility," says Morten 
Nilsson, chief executive of NowPensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>.

Will graduates and others in their early 20s, already weighed down by debt 
from student loans, high rents and ever-increasing house prices, now have to 
work into their dotage?

Guardian Money asked pension experts how much young people will have to put 
aside to achieve a minimal income to bridge the gap between 65 and 70 years old 
when they will start receiving a state pension. We found that a 22-year-old 
would have to save an extra £39,000 if they want to match the £7,800 a year 
state pension for five years, allowing them to retire earlier.

Tom McPhail of advisers Hargreaves Lansdown reckons that today's young adults 
will have to find an extra £33 a month all the way through to the age of 65 
just to bridge the gap. And even that figure assumes their savings grow by 6% a 
year in a well-managed investment fund and that the monthly savings increase by 
2.5% every year.

"The important thing is to start saving as soon as you possibly can," he says. 
"Even a modest monthly saving now can make a real difference to your financial 
freedom in the future. Delay five years and you'll slash your eventual payout 
by as much as 30%," he says.

The Society of Pensions Consultants says someone under 25 would have to save 
an extra 30-40% to bridge the gap. So if you were paying 5% of your salary into 
a pension it would need to increase to at least 6.5%.

Even that isn't enough. "Experts recommend putting aside at least 12% of your 
salary to save for a comfortable retirement," Nilsson says.

Insurer NFU Mutual's research shows most people don't start thinking about 
their retirement prospects until the age of 48, by which time it'stoo late to 
catch up unless you can save huge amounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/dec/07/state-pensions-pensions>.

"Hopefully the newspaper headlines saying 'work until you're 70' will shock a 
few people into taking some action sooner rather than later," says Sean McCann 
of NFU Mutual.

Fortunately for employees, firms will now have to sign workers up to their 
pension scheme.Auto-enrolment 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/money/auto-enrolment-pensions> is gradually being 
introduced across all sizes of companies and has already started at large firms.

Your firm will contribute to your pension – say 4% of your salary – and you 
can match it. Although employees can choose to opt out, it's like having a 
tax-free pay rise, as payments into a pension qualify for tax relief.

The default retirement age in workplace schemes will match the state pension 
age, but you can choose to take your pension from the age of 55.

"Join a workplace pension as soon as you possibly can to enjoy the benefit of 
the extras contributions your employer will make to your retirement fund," 
McPhail says. "Even if you don't want to commit to a pension early on, at least 
start saving into a tax-free Isa, you can always move the money across to a 
pension later on."
 