
Scientists say the accidental shipment by the US army of live anthrax from a 
laboratory inUtah <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/utah> could point to 
deficiencies in the military’s system for handling the bacteria.

Anthrax: Pentagon accidentally sent bioweapon to as many as nine states
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/27/pentagon-live-anthrax-accident>
On Wednesday, Pentagon officials told reporters that Dugway Proving Ground in 
Utah had inadvertently shipped live anthrax to commercial labs in nine states – 
California, Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Tennessee, Virginia, 
Texas and Wisconsin – and South Korea.

The shipments reportedly began in March 2014, when the anthrax was reported to 
be inactivated after being irradiated. Shipments of the pathogen continued 
through April 2015, Reuters reported.

Officials have said the mistake did not pose a risk to the public, though four 
civilians have been placed on a preventative course of medication, which 
usually includes antibiotics. Twenty-two workers in South Korea are being 
treated preventatively.

Military officials said army technicians believed they had inactivated the 
bacteria at the time it was sent, and that all protocols appeared to have been 
followed.

“The best I can tell there was not human error,” chief of staff Raymond 
Odierno told reporters on Thursday, Reuters reported, while cautioning that the 
information was based solely on preliminary reports. The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) is investigating the failure.

But beyond a broad sketch of the events that led the dangerous pathogen to be 
shipped to commercial labs, officials at the Department of Defense have 
released little information. Rather than respond to a list of questions from 
the Guardian, the department provided a statement recapping reported facts in 
the story.

It is unclear, for example, what protocols were in place to inactivate the 
bacteria, and to confirm that status before the anthrax was shipped and 
received.

“The incident involved exactly the same chain of errors as the CDC shipments 
of live anthrax bacteria in 2006 and 2014,” Richard H Ebright, professor of 
chemical biology at Rutgers University, told the Guardian in an email.

Ebright said technicians failed to “inactivate a sample, followed by a failure 
to confirm inactivation before shipping the sample, followed by … a failure to 
confirm inactivation upon receiving the sample”.

“This seems to be a problem that happens pretty regularly,” said Gigi Kwik 
Gronvall, a senior associate at the Center for Health Security at the 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in Baltimore, Maryland.

“Even if people are not following the protocol … then perhaps the protocol 
should be modified to make sure it’s easier to follow, and more likely to bring 
about compliance. It’s more, to me, that not enough is known about the 
situation.”

Gronvall noted that the military had made a point of reporting the incident. 
“In many other, different places in the world there would be no notice that 
something happened incorrectly,” she said.

In some cases, clearing laboratories appears to have been left to state 
officials,as in New Jersey 
<http://www.northjersey.com/news/nj-lab-mistakenly-received-live-anthrax-shipment-from-the-us-army-1.1344449>
. There, state health, environmental and police hazardous materials responders 
were sent to the private lab.

Eleven months ago, a similar incident played out at CDC headquarters in 
Atlanta, Georgia.

There, a lack of “standard operating procedures 
<http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/p0711-lab-safety.html>” led to dozens 
of employees being exposed to anthrax after a high-containment laboratory 
inadvertently sent live anthrax to labs with lower contaminant levels, where 
workers were not equipped to handle such dangerous pathogens.

The mistake happened after workers did not fully inactivate a pathogenic 
strain of the bacteria. Normally labs irradiate anthrax, butscientists at the 
CDC 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/20/health/up-to-75-cdc-scientists-may-have-been-exposed-to-anthrax.html?_r=0>
 were working on new methods to inactivate the material for local health 
departments that might not have expensive irradiation machines.

Both Ebright and the Government Accountability Office (GAO) have been critical 
of the government’s expansion of high-containment laboratories without an 
overarching regulatory body.

“There are approximately 1,500 US laboratories authorized to work with fully 
active, fully virulent, biological weapons agents,” said Ebright, who has 
worked to sound the alarm on lab safety since funding increased in 2002. “This 
number is too large by a factor of 10 to 20.”

Because labs have at least some risk of making mistakes with such agents, the 
GAO and Ebright said the more labs, the bigger the risk to the public.

At least three agencies, including the defense department, the CDC and the 
Department of Agriculture, oversee such labs, and regulators largely rely on 
“self-policing”,the GAO reported <http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-14-785T>. 

“Oversight is critical in improving biosafety and ensuring that 
high-containment laboratories comply with regulations,” the report said. 
“However, our work has found that aspects of the current oversight programs … 
depend on entities’ monitoring themselves and reporting incidents to the 
regulators.”

Stopping the spread of such bacteria is just one problem with such a diffuse 
system. The GAO also found that labs could duplicate efforts and waste taxpayer 
money without coordinated government oversight.

More labs began working with dangerous agents like anthrax in the 1990s, but 
the number grew substantially after a number of anthrax-laced letters were sent 
to lawmakers and media outlets through the US Postal Service in 2001. Since 
then, theCDC has led the investment <http://www.cdc.gov/phpr/coopagreement.htm> 
of at least $9bn in state and local health agencies.
 