
The Pentagon has demanded that WikiLeaks immediately erase the huge cache of 
secret US military files about the Afghan war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs> it has posted online and hand 
over another 15,000 classified records in its possession.

Condemning the whistleblowers' website for inciting the leaking of military 
secrets, the Department of Defence warned it would examine ways to compel
WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> to "do the right thing" 
if it did not do so voluntarily.

"The only acceptable course is for WikiLeaks to take steps to immediately 
return all versions of all of those documents to the US government and 
permanently delete them from its website, computers and records," Pentagon 
spokesman Geoff Morrell said yesterday.

"If doing the right thing is not good enough for them then we will figure out 
what alternatives we have to compel them to do the right thing."

Although the defence department has no independent power to enforce its 
demands, its increasingly threatening language is seen as a bid to deter 
WikiLeaks from releasing the 15,000 Afghan war records it has not published as 
well as an encrypted file recently added to the site entitled "insurance".

WikiLeaks posted more than 76,900 records of incidents and intelligence 
reports about the Afghan war on its website last month, providing a devastating 
portrait of the failing war. They reveal how coalition forces have killed 
hundreds of civilians in unreported incidents, how Taliban attacks have soared 
and how Nato commanders fear neighbouring Pakistan and Iran are fuelling the 
insurgency.

The publication of the files, which were made available to the Guardian, the 
New York Times and the German weekly Der Spiegel, was one of the biggest leaks 
inUS military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> history.

Morrell said public disclosure of the secret documents had already threatened 
the safety of coalition troops and Afghan informants, a charge which 
WikiLeaks's founder, Julian Assange, denies. Morrell said disclosure of any 
further material would "only make the damage worse".

He said a task force of about 80 government intelligence experts was examining 
the files already published on WikiLeaks and were doing "proactive" work to 
assess the risk posed by the other 15,000 records, which Assange has said the 
site held back to protect innocent people from harm.

Army private Bradley Manning, who has already been arrested and charged over 
leaking classified material to WikiLeaks in a previous case, was also described 
by Morrell as a "person of interest" in the current investigation over the 
latest huge leak.
 