
The Pentagon disclosed Wednesday that it inadvertently shipped possibly live 
anthrax to at least 51 laboratories across the US and in three foreign 
countries over the past decade, but it has yet to determine how it happened, 
who is to blame, why it was not discovered earlier and how much worse the 
embarrassment will get.

One of the few things Pentagon officials said they were sure of is that public 
health is not at risk.

Anthrax: Pentagon accidentally sent bioweapon to as many as nine states
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/27/pentagon-live-anthrax-accident>
“We know of no risk to the general public,” deputy defense secretary Robert 
Work told a Pentagon news conference. He said the suspect anthrax was shipped 
in such low concentrations and in such secure packaging that it almost 
certainly posed no health risk to anyone outside the 51 labs.

The anthrax was supposed to have been killed with gamma rays by Defense 
Department lab technicians before being shipped for use by commercial labs and 
government facilities in research and the calibration of biohazard sensors. But 
for reasons not yet explained, the anthrax apparently remained alive.

To compound the error, follow-up lab tests to verify that the anthrax had been 
killed before being shipped apparently also failed. One question for the 
ongoing investigation is whether a sufficiently large sample size of the 
irradiated anthrax was used in the verification tests, or whether those 
follow-up tests were even performed.

Officials said the mistakes appear to have begun in 2005 or 2006, although 
Work said the Pentagon did not become aware of them until alerted 22 May by an 
unidentified commercial lab in Maryland. That lab reported that supposedly dead 
anthrax samples it received from an army laboratory contained live spores.

Navy Cmdr Franca Jones, director of Pentagon medical programs for chemical and 
biological defense, told reporters that 31 individuals are receiving 
antibiotics as a precaution but none are sick. She said 19 of the 51 
laboratories that received suspect anthrax have submitted it to the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention for testing, and said that of nine samples fully 
tested thus far, all nine have proven to contain live anthrax.

“We’ll find more” labs received the suspect anthrax than the 51 notified thus 
far, Jones predicted, since more than 400 master batches of anthrax at four 
Defense Department laboratories that are responsible for shipping it to 
commercial laboratories have yet to be tested for live anthrax spores.

Of four batches fully tested thus far – all at the army’s Dugway Proving 
Ground in Utah – all four have been determined to contain live anthrax, even 
though the material had undergone irradiation in accordance with a 
well-established but apparently flawed protocol for killing the anthrax.

Jones said the samples from those master batches were shipped as long ago as 
2006. She did not provide a full timeline for the shipments, although some were 
received in recent months.

The three other Defense Department labs that are authorized to perform similar 
functions with anthrax are in Maryland, according to a Pentagon spokesman, Col 
Steve Warren. He said the Pentagon is legally prohibited from disclosing the 
names of the dozens of commercial laboratories in 17 states and the District of 
Columbia that received suspect anthrax. They are in California, Delaware, 
Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, 
Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, Arizona, Florida, Illinois, Ohio, North 
Carolina and the District of Columbia.

The scope of the problem has grown almost daily since the Pentagon first 
acknowledged it publicly 27 May. On that date the Pentagon reported that labs 
in nine states were affected. A short time later it said the suspect anthrax 
also had been received at a US military facility at Osan Air Base in South 
Korea. By the end of the week the number had grown to 25 labs in 11 states plus 
Australia and Canada. At that point Work, the deputy defense secretary, ordered 
a comprehensive review of laboratory procedures associated with killing live 
anthrax.

Work said the Pentagon will take steps to hold people accountable for the 
lapses once the CDC has completed its investigation into what happened at 
Dugway.
 