
Pentagon anthrax blunder reveals 'chain of errors' in government lab protocols
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/29/anthrax-pentagon-labs-regulations>
Defense Secretary Ash Carter said on Sunday that he will find out who was 
responsible for the mistaken shipments of live anthrax to 11 US states and two 
countries and will “hold them accountable”.

Calling the shipments an “unfortunate incident”, Carter said the Pentagon 
would make “sure that any public health consequences of this are avoided” and 
ensure it never happens again.

Live anthrax samples from the Army’s Dugway Proving Ground in Utah were 
mistakenly sent to 24 laboratories, including ones in Australia andSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>. Questions have been raised 
about possible flaws in Dugway’s procedures to ensure that anthrax samples were 
made fully inert before shipping them to labs.

Carter spoke after a visit to the Vietnamese navy’s headquarters at the port 
city of Haiphong.

He said he was keeping in close contact with Pentagon officials to make sure 
the department is working with the US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) to address the problem.

Deputy US Defense Secretary Bob Work has ordered a comprehensive review of 
laboratory procedures associated with inactivating anthrax.

Dugway, in a desolate stretch of the Utah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/utah> desert, has been testing chemical 
weapons since it opened in 1942.

The CDC said suspect samples from Dugway had been sent to 18 labs in nine US 
states and a military base in South Korea. Later, the Pentagon said the Army 
may have mistakenly sent live anthrax to a laboratory in Australia in 2008.

Carter met with Australian Minister of Defense Kevin Andrews during an 
international security conference in Singapore on Saturday and gave him an 
update on the problem.

CDC spokesman Jason McDonald said four people at labs in Delaware, Texas and 
Wisconsin were recommended to get antibiotics as a precaution, although they 
are not sick. About two dozen people were being treated for possible exposure 
at Osan Air Base in South Korea.
 