
There's nothing like the death of a public figure to remind you of the modern 
media's insatiable appetite for comment. Within minutes of Margaret Thatcher's 
death being announced, emails and phone calls began to arrive. Requests from 
newspapers, television, radio. And, lest I should start to feel too flattered 
by this eagerness to sound out my opinions, it soon turned out that most other 
writers I knew were fielding the same sort of attention.

I said no to almost all of these overtures – out of bemusement, as much as 
anything else, at my own failure to feel anything when I heard the news. Of 
course it is interesting, and important, to debate Thatcher's legacy, but 
really, when you think about it – why now? Why this rush for judgment? Why not 
next week, next month or, for that matter, the month before? Why should 
discussion of major public figures have to be pegged to a news story, and why 
does that story so often have to be that their vital organs have given out – 
the one event in all our lives that is inevitable, and therefore unexceptional?

There are thousands of deaths every day. I know this, because at the beginning 
of this year, my own father's was one of them. He died in January, aged 84, and 
although, understandably, I have rarely stopped thinking about him since, 
Thatcher's death has been making me think about him even more acutely, and in a 
different way.

He was a great admirer of Thatcher, my dad. An instinctive and lifelong 
Conservative, he was full of praise (as much as such a quiet man can be) for 
the Iron Lady and all those who surrounded her. I vividly remember that, after 
he had ploughed his way throughWhat a Carve Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/09/jonathan-coe-carve-book-club>, 
my satirical novel about the politics of the 1980s, his first response was to 
congratulate me, and his second was to hand me a copy ofJeffrey Archer's Kane 
and Abel 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780230743977>
, with a gentle hint that I should read it and learn from the master before I 
made any more botched attempts. To the best of my knowledge he never readThe 
House of Sleep <http://www.complete-review.com/reviews/coej/sleep.htm>, another 
book of mine that critiqued Thatcher. It is less often discussed in those 
terms, but I had her at the back of my mind when I wrote my comedy on the 
effects of willed insomnia: she often boasted of getting by on three or four 
hours' sleep every night, and I always suspected that her apparent loss of 
perspective and self-awareness in those final months of office had less to do 
with the corrosive effects of power than with long-term sleep deprivation.

What would my father have made of the coverage of her demise? He would have 
followed it avidly, glued to the Daily Telegraph and his beloved BBC News 
website. At the end of the week, his opinions about her would not have changed, 
any more than anyone's have. So far, out of the deluge of comment, most of it 
deeply informed and passionately argued on both sides, the most we can really 
salvage is the insight tweeted by writer Tim Lott on Tuesday: "Apparently 
leftwingers thought she was a bad thing, and rightwingers thought she was a 
good thing. Who knew?"

I would have voted for her myself, if I had been old enough, in 1979. Four 
years later, after a spell at university had given me the chance to creep out 
from the shadow of my father's politics, I cast my vote forMichael Foot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-foot> and the manifesto 
described, famously, as the longest suicide note in political history. For 
the rest of that decade my opposition, and that of most of my friends, was 
entrenched. And little has changed on that front. Nothing I have read this week 
by her admirers has persuaded me that the lightning bolt of energy she applied 
to moribund Britain in 1979 justified the downsides: her assault on the concept 
of community, her failure of imagination when it came to those weaker than 
herself, the fatal freedoms she showered on her adored "wealth creators" in the 
City, whose recklessness brought about the crisis of 2008 and has cost the 
taxpayer billions more pounds in bailouts than the most wayward or power-drunk 
shop steward ever cost us back in the "militant" 1970s.

Meanwhile, the long weeks after my father's death – grotesquely unexpected 
despite his age – have brought not just mourning but introspection. Now that 
his physical presence is missing from my family, it's as if a view has been 
unblocked: I've been amazed by how much better I've come to understand things 
about myself, about the dynamic of my family life, which remained mysterious, 
unknowable, while he was alive.

And with Thatcher, I wonder if the same thing is about to happen. The day 
after her death I took the Eurostar to Paris and picked up a copy of Libération 
at my hotel. The paper led with a front page that brought the concepts of death 
and Thatcherism into stark union: a monochrome photograph, with a three-word 
caption:La grande faucheuse – the Grim Reaper. Morbid and pitiless, but clever. 
Now she's gone, the debate is bound not just to continue but to deepen, and 
perhaps evolve into something more than a mosaic of polarised opinions. I hope 
so. Death itself is not a news story, after all; death is not surprising. The 
only surprising thing about it, as I've learned this year, is the clarity it 
can bring.
 