
Cagey Test match batsmen of the old school – of which Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> was a fine example – are fond 
of pointing out that even the leave-alone is a shot in its own right, a means 
of defining the lines of battle. On a day of diffuse and damaging public 
jousting via official statement and social media, England's team director has 
continued to tread warily in the increasingly farcical fallout from England's 
Ashes humiliation.

Initial reports, first published in the Guardian, that Flower might consider 
stepping down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/07/andy-flower-england-team-director-kevin-pietersen>
 if Kevin Pietersen is allowed to play on with England drew an extraordinary 
response as Flowerreleased a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/08/andy-flower-kevin-pietersen-england-future>
 via theEngland and Wales Cricket Board website 
<http://www.ecb.co.uk/news/articles/statement-andy-flower> that, while 
forthright in its denials, amounted to an exercise not in counterattack but in 
aggressive evasion, a growl back down the wicket with bat raised.

"I repeat that neither I nor the wider ECB leadership group have made any 
decisions as to the future involvement of any individuals in the playing group 
or in the support staff," Flower wrote. "The reports that I have issued an 
ultimatum of some description to the ECB are totally inaccurate."

Shortly after Flower's statement Pietersen made some of his own feelings 
<https://twitter.com/KP24> evident via Twitter. "I am shocked and saddened by 
reports in the media today concerning my future with England," he wrote. "I 
wish to repeat my strong desire to continue playing for my country, and to help 
us regain the Ashes in 2015." Pietersen also described as "complete and utter 
lies" a suggestion that he is facing disciplinary action as a result of his 
attitude to England warm-up games.

It is, on the face of it, a horribly confusing mess. In denying he has issued 
an ultimatum, Flower has rebutted an accusation that has not actually been 
made, while failing to deny the significant content of the reports. In fact, in 
his statement Flower pointedly failed to mention Pietersen at all. Instead he 
appears to be playing for time once again, playing this one like his England 
team plays their Test cricket, speaking "dry" when others might be tempted to 
press more forcefully.

Flower's allies in all this are within the ECB hierarchy, albeit Paul Downton 
– perhaps not significantly, but still a point of fact – has yet to commit 
himself publicly on anybody's future. Pietersen's allies are on the outside, 
chiefly the punditry heavyweights Shane Warne, Michael Vaughan and – with 
apologies – the TV chat show host Piers Morgan. If Flower is treading carefully 
it is because the situation is weighted in his favour, for now, pending a 
casting public vote from the new chief executive.

And so we wait for this increasingly tedious operetta to play itself out. It 
is a horribly gripping post-meltdown meltdown, albeit one that is worth keeping 
in perspective.

As English cricket gawps at the spectacle of a man from Harare and a man from 
KwlaZulu-Natal jousting in its front parlour it is tempting to assume what is 
going on, here is in some way an epic confrontation, rather than simply a 
collision of individuals who happen to be in the front rank. It is in effect a 
standoff on top of a moving train, a process of flinching for the holster, all 
with one eye on the looming railway tunnel that is the IPL auction starting on 
12 February, the next significant date in this saga of departure. Pietersen is 
sure to be offered a big-rupee, three-year contract. Should he accept it Flower 
will have the lever to force his issue.

And yet there is also another way of playing this, one which involves 
acknowledging that English cricket is in itself a precious commodity, and not 
simply an individual's bargaining chip. Flower may well be, in coaching terms, 
the best man to rebuild the England team. But given the chronic and 
debilitating nature of England's Ashes and post-Ashes humiliation – what is 
being described by some as the Pommieshambles – it is tempting to conclude the 
most sensible ending here is not Pietersen goes or Flower goes but that both go.

Imagine for a moment that Flower gets his way, or the way that he has since 
denied he has requested. One of England's greatest batsmen, a popular (and also 
unpopular) player with the public is forced into early retirement by a coach 
who has just lost an Ashes series 5-0. What kind of relationship can Flower 
hope to have with his players in future or indeed England's supporters?

How will this extraordinary step affect the pressures already on him, or on 
England's next No4 batsman. England will at some stage next summer struggle in 
a Test. Flower is already unpopular with some England supporters who see only 
his lack of contrition in humiliating defeat and the stodgy tempo of his team.

Such is the strength of feeling among those who pay to watch, it is not hard 
to imagine this England team being booed during a Test, to imagine KP's name 
being chanted, distantly, as a callow middle order struggles. Odd as it might 
sound to those infuriated by his egocentric behaviour, a brief, bizarre and 
distinctly niche cricketing martyrdom may even be within Pietersen's grasp.

Plus, it looks odd to cast Pietersen as instant scapegoat for such a profound 
unravelling. He was not responsible for the Ashes selection problems, for 
Jonathan Trott's retirement, Boyd Rankin's lack of fitness, for Chris 
Tremlett's (well-known) lack of pace, or the fact Graeme Swann seems to have 
kept the degree of his physical deterioration to himself. If Pietersen really 
is a central object of friction within this demoralised England team, why was 
he not dropped during the series?

Quite where this is all heading remains to be seen. Clearly the ideal 
situation is that both men pull themselves up to their full height, appreciate 
how privileged they are to be senior ECB employees, and get on with spending 
another two years playing cricket together. But perhaps the next best is that 
both are encouraged simultaneously to move on. If only to allow a more profound 
sluicing of the accumulated poison from a toxic and unedifying piece of theatre.
 