
The night before I flew to the rainforest, I stayed at a hotel in Cuzco. There 
was a startling mural stretching the length of the dining room which showed a 
fantasy of an Amazonian paradise: bare-breasted maidens bathing in idyllic 
pools surrounded by luxuriant greenery and compliant jungle animals; the only 
thing most were wearing was a pendant of vaguely Incaic design. Pass the jojoba 
shampoo.

I was not quite sure what I expected from the Amazon. It's become such a 
romanticised ecological symbol – a flagship of all we stand to lose – that it's 
hard to see the trees for the wood. Which is why I wanted to spend some time in 
them, on a small patch of land, a malaria-free reserve near the Peruvian town 
of Puerto Maldonado, close to the Bolivian border.

Specifically, I was headed for the Reserva Amazonica, where José Koechlin, the 
ecologist and hotelier who helped German director Werner Herzog with his epic 
films Fitzcarraldo and Aguirre: Wrath of God, has just built a bedroom 90ft up 
a tree.

When the lodge first told me I'd be sleeping up a tree, I had assumed it was 
Latin hyperbole; but no, there the treehouse was, clinging to the slender trunk 
of a cepanchila. To get there you had to climb a wooden tower and a series of 
rope walkways.

As first guest and "guinea pig" (not a comforting concept in Peru), I was 
issued with a panic button so that if necessary a member of staff could rush 
in, strap me to their chest and abseil down to the ground, like a ninja turtle. 
In the event I kept my finger off the button, although sleeping that high was 
certainly an intense experience. The nearest analogy I can think of is being in 
a small cabin at sea, with the wind and outside noise amplified, which was 
quite something the night a troupe of monkeys descended on the cabin, rattled 
the walkway and played on the roof. In the early morning, the dawn chorus was 
raucous and spectacular, from the horned screamer bird which some say sounds 
like a donkey drowning, to the "water dropping from a giant tube" 
gloop-gloop-gloop noises of the oropendola. There were also tree frogs that 
sounded exactly like digital cameras bleeping.

My guide Eric joined me in the treehouse at 5am so we could see the sun rise 
over the top of the Amazon rainforest. It felt Biblical, a moment of creation. 
I had become used to seeing the sun slowly filter its way to the forest floor – 
but above the canopy it came up fast, like a searchlight, and illuminated the 
heads of the matate and ceiba trees so that they looked like fibre optic lamps.

Eric pointed out a paradise tanager in a nearby tree, its blues startlingly 
vivid. He listed the ways in which the locals could survive: by logging or 
gold-panning, which was environmentally destructive; by gathering brazil nuts, 
which was slow and subject to the whims of the market; but the best of all, 
said Eric, is you – the tourist. Tourism is one of the few economic factors 
that can persuade a government to preserve a rainforest. It's a curious 
thought, but he may be right: if we really want to save the Amazon, we should 
go and stay there.

• A night at the Inkaterra Canopy Tree House (inkaterra.com 
<http://www.inkaterra.com>) starts from US$300 per person (based on two 
sharing). Journey Latin America (020-8747 8315,journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk/destination/South-America-Antarctica/Peru.aspx>
) sells flights from London to Puerto Maldonado, with a stopover in Lima in 
both directions, from £825 rtn inc tax
 