
Peter Wright, who has died aged 82, was a thoughtful senior police officer 
whose work was overshadowed by the Hillsborough football tragedy and his South 
Yorkshire force's reaction to its aftermath. His later life would have been 
different if he had resigned after the catastrophe in April 1989, which saw 96 
fans die in a lethally mishandled crush on the terraces in Sheffield. But he 
felt it was his duty to see his staff through the first stages of recovery.

His loyalty was misplaced and Wright adhered too long to the misconception 
that drunken supporters played a major part in the disaster. By the time he did 
offer to step down, following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's 
criticism of the police in his 1990 report, the force was compromised amid 
rancour that still continues.

The publication of all government papers relating to Hillsborough, expected 
within the coming year, is likely to shed further light on the episode, from 
the initial shock that left Wright "pale and inarticulate" (according to the 
then home secretary Douglas Hurd), through subsequent manoeuvring. It will take 
longer for history to assess Wright's part in the initial rebuilding of his 
staff's confidence on the foundation of previous good policing in the county, 
that Hillsborough damaged so badly.

Wright's career had reached a peak only the year before. He served as 
president of the Association of ChiefPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Officers, which still uses his name – 
the Wright Protocol – for arrangements to encourage a common front among the 
heads of the UK's 43 forces. Wary of mavericks or colleagues with personal 
agendas, Wright won approval for a protocol requiring chief constables to 
support Acpo policies publicly unless they objected in advance, in writing.

This discipline had roots in Wright's cautious style as a chief constable. He 
was born and brought up in Stockport, Cheshire, and educated at Catholic 
schools and technical college before joining the Royal Navy and serving as a 
rating for two years. He joined the police in Manchester as a constable in 
1954, where he spent his early years, became a chief superintendent in 1975 and 
assistant chief constable shortly afterwards, then joined Merseyside as deputy 
in 1979. He took over as chief in South Yorkshire in 1983, served on the parole 
review committee in 1987-8 and after retirement was an adviser to the Ministry 
of Defence police for three years.

He was often described by colleagues as a "police officer's policeman". He had 
no compunction in endorsing potentially controversial measures against those he 
perceived to be troublemakers. But his time on the streets also taught him the 
value of listening to everyone, including critics. The willingness to take 
tough action was exemplified by the close watch his force put onArthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill>, the president of the 
National Union of Miners; the details of that investigation, including "a view 
to possible prosecution", were revealed in 2009 by the BBC through a Freedom of 
Information Act request. But his openness saw him unofficially encourage the 
role of influential peacemakers during the 1981 Toxteth riots in Liverpool.

Although his immediate task as deputy chief constable was to protect the 
city's police HQ from violent gangs, he agreed to intervention by Liverpool's 
two archbishops, the Anglican David Sheppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/07/guardianobituaries.religion> and 
the Roman Catholic Derek Worlock, both of whom wielded great clout. Wright was 
aware that the chief constable might not have chosen such a path, but he felt 
the need for rapid decision-making absolved him from going through the formal 
channels. He subsequently earned a name for accessibility to the media and his 
attempts to explain police decisions to outsiders.

He emphasised on leaving South Yorkshire that he had always intended to retire 
at 60. His apologies for the force's failure at Hillsborough always sat with a 
belief that the police were not the only people deserving blame.

South Yorkshire's current chief constable, Meredydd Hughes, said: "His long 
and very successful career as a professional and dedicated officer was 
inevitably overshadowed by the events of that day, but he was resolute in 
responding to the various enquiries and was always fully supportive of those 
colleagues more closely involved. The force remembers him with respect and 
affection."

Wright was appointed OBE in 1982 and CBE in 1988. He is survived by his wife, 
Mary, and a son.

• Peter Wright, chief constable, born 21 July 1929; died 17 September 2011
 