
It’s nearly a decade since Peter Ho Davies published his first novel, The 
Welsh Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview17>
, but a quarter of a century since he left these shores for the US. Half his 
life, he remarks, given that very shortly he will celebrate his 50th birthday. 
“My wife and I are jokingly calling it 50 years of hurt,” he laughs, “but it’s 
not really.” In fact, that’s just a play on his mother’s memories of carrying 
him when England won the World Cup. “It has been a very good 50 years.”

His second novel, The Fortunes, published by Sceptre, is a pretty good way to 
mark the milestone. A quartet of linked stories that alight on paradigmatic 
periods and figures in the history of Chinese America, it is not only an 
absorbing, thrillingly serious read, but also draws together many of Davies’s 
preoccupations, fictional, intellectual, political and personal.

Chief among them is the slippery question of identity, which we fall to 
discussing as we wander through the cobbled streets and 1960s shopping 
precincts of his hometown, Coventry, towards the city’s bombed-out St Michael’s 
Cathedral. It is a city that has become a byword for devastation – in German, 
the verb “Koventrieren” means to devastate – and for renewal. It is also where 
Davies’s parents – his Welsh father, an engineer, and Malaysian Chinese mother, 
a dentist – settled and still live, hence the visit home. Davies grew up here, 
and points out the WH Smith where he used to buy books and the square where 
fans gathered whenCoventry City won the FA Cup in 1987 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/may/16/fa-cup-final-tottenham-coventry-classic-1987>
. But, he wonders, “Could I have become a writer if I’d stayed in Britain? It 
was helpful to go to somewhere else and reinvent myself and not see the friends 
who knew me as a physics undergraduate, or the parents who knew me as their 
son.”

I ask Davies whether, given how long he has lived in the US, he feels as if he 
has become an American writer. He replies, half-humorously, that it all depends 
how well the book does there. But, he continues, “there’s not an identity that 
I can lay claim to that I don’t also feel ambiguous or ambivalent about, 
whether that’s Chineseness, or Welshness, or Britishness. Do I have some 
hesitation to claim Americanness? Yes. But I feel the same hesitancy to claim 
any of those identities.”

There’s not an identity I can claim that I don’t feel ambivalent about, 
whether Chineseness, Welshness or Britishness

The characters in The Fortunes <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fortunes.html>
 experience that same ambivalence, manifested in strikingly different fashion. 
In the first part, set in Sacramento and the Sierra Nevada of the 1860s, Ling, 
a young Hong Kong Chinese man, works his way from laundryman to become the 
personal servant of a railroad entrepreneur. His employer, Charles Crocker, is 
so impressed by his efficiency and commitment that he expands his use of 
Chinese labour in building the tracks. Ling gives way to a vividly sketched 
dash through the life of Anna May Wong, the first Chinese-American film star, 
who was nonetheless overlooked for the leading role in the film of Pearl Buck’s 
The Good Earth in favour of Luise Rainer. And then we are well into the 20th 
century, and the harrowing account of Vincent Chin, who was beaten to death in 
Detroit in 1982, mistaken for a Japanese man by two men who believed that Japan 
had devastated the American car industry.

Each of these protagonists was a real person, with the possible exception of 
Ling, who appears almost as a footnote in biographies of Crocker and, concedes 
Davies, might even be apocryphal. But that was precisely what fascinated him. 
“The historical record looks at him but has no interest in him,” he explains, 
adding: “I used to joke about him being Asian Zero”, a “threshold figure” who 
ushered in a generation of Chinese workers determined to stay in the US rather 
than return home.

Ling is part of what Davies refers to as “the subaltern history” he is trying 
to write, but Wong and Chin, whose murder prompted a protest movement and a 
discussion of civil rights in the Asian-American community, are more prominent 
figures. Why draw on history rather than invent? “There would have been 
something disingenuous or even coy about that,” he replies. “To create a 
Chinese-American movie star who is not Wong but to call her the first? It felt 
like a very thin disguise.”

But there is perhaps more to it than that. As we talk, the depth of Davies’s 
interest in authenticity and the construction of identity becomes increasingly 
apparent. InThe Fortunes’ final part, we meet John Smith, a writer of Chinese 
descent whose work includes explorations of the transcontinental railroad, Wong 
and Chin. Smith’s confidence has never quite recovered from a reading at which 
a Chinese student lengthily corrects his use of language: “‘Also, please, this 
one word,gu gu jai – it does mean penis,’ the student said with as much 
distaste as he might handle one, ‘but I think is baby penis, what you call baby 
talk, what a mother say, not so … romantic between two lovers.’”

Davies’s first book, a collection of short stories entitled The Ugliest House 
in the World, appeared in 1997 and won the John Llewellyn Rhys prize and the 
PEN/Macmillan Silver Pen award; it explored both his Welsh and Malaysian 
Chinese heritage. Ten years later – “you know, books take me a while” – came 
the Booker-longlistedThe Welsh Girl, set in Snowdonia in the second world war, 
and featuring another historical figure, Rudolf Hess; and then another story 
collection,Equal Love, set in England and the US. Throughout, he has been 
coming back to the same concerns: “I’m not sure of my claim to Welshness,” he 
elaborates, “so I wroteThe Welsh Girl to explore that, to find out what 
Welshness meant to me. And the same thing motivated me as I wroteThe Fortunes. 
I’m half-Chinese by blood, but probably much less than half-Chinese by culture, 
so what is my relationship to that? I felt some of the same things to 
Welshness, partly because I don’t speak the language.”

Review: The Welsh Girl by Peter Ho Davies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview17>
But immediately he qualifies, unwilling to parcel his thoughts up too neatly: 
“Even as I say that – half-Welsh, half-Chinese – partly it’s coming to terms 
with halfness, and almost trying to push back on that very conceptualisation, 
which suggests you have to be this or that.” This situation is problematised in
The Fortunes, in which Ling is also “half”; his father is a white man he never 
meets; at various points, he feels the urge to confide in his American employer 
but can’t, Davies explains, because of his pride in being perceived as an 
exemplary Chinese man.

It’s an area to which the writer repeatedly feels drawn: “I’m often interested 
in that disparity between the way we internalise our identity and the way that 
we represent it outwardly. I can seem and look very Chinese. As a child I was 
quite self-conscious about that, and growing up in a place that was largely 
white, maybe made to feel self-conscious about it.” He often feels, when he is 
in Chinese-American communities, “a kind of envy of people in those 
communities, because for them, there were a lot of other Chinese people around. 
When I was in school here, I had two or three friends from south-east Asia, one 
of them, his mother was Filipino, his father was white or British, and the only 
other Chinese person in school of my age, his parents were both Chinese from 
Jamaica. So there is a connection, but there’s also a very distinct cultural 
space.”

It strikes me that neither of his parents was living in the community of their 
birth; neither, he adds, had English as a first language. He is moved when he 
recalls the occasion when he was 12 or 13 and walking into town with his 
father. They saw a young Sikh man being chased and beaten up by a group, “in my 
memory, I want to see them as skinheads, I’m not even sure it was as clear-cut 
as that”. His father rushed to help, and Davies says, “it’s not just the 
bravery of it, although I think it was, it was the instinctiveness … Also that 
he recognised it for what it was, straightaway.”

We need more Asian American kids growing up to be artists, not doctors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/16/asian-american-jobs-success-myth-arts>
Years later, he read in front of his parents for the first time, at the 
Waterstones in Coventry, and chose a passage fromThe Welsh Girl that echoed the 
incident, which he recounted. It was nice, he says, to say publicly how proud 
he was of his father. “And the nature of our British, manly relationship was 
that I couldn’t have said that to him one-to-one, but oddly I could say it in 
front of an audience. We never talked about it afterwards.”

Living in Ann Arbor, and teaching at the University of Michigan, has 
inevitably concentrated his thinking about race; his students of colour will 
often ask, “‘Why does my work have to bear all that burden?’ And I think 
they’re right.” He also agrees with them when they point out that “white 
writers are writing about race too. To write about whiteness is to write about 
race.”

We talk about the idea of lived experience, and how being inhibited by the 
fear of appropriating others’ stories, particularly when they relate to race, 
can sit at odds with the writer’s mandate to invent and empathise. He tells me 
what he tells his students, when they ask whether they have the right to tackle 
such work: “What I say is – that’s a respectful attitude. I understand why they 
think they shouldn’t do that. But that respect and that hesitancy – I don’t 
want that to stop you trying. Because that very respect is what’s going to help 
you make it good. It’s what’s going to help you do it well.”

I think post-Brexit, an Asian Captain Britain would be good

Over two and half hours, we have talked about the complexity of the 
relationships between marginalised and oppressed groups in the face of 
a limited “bandwidth” of sympathy, what Davies calls “almost a rationing 
mentality on white guilt”; about myriad writers includingJennifer Egan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jennifer-egan>, Jonathan Franzen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-franzen>, Kazuo Ishiguro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kazuoishiguro>; about Welsh football; about 
alien abduction narratives as a stand-in for a submerged discussion about race. 
He has revealed his desire to write a story about the making ofKing Kong: “It’s 
a pop culture phenomenon and it’s also an anti-miscegenation tract, maybe? I’ve 
also thought it would be great to show it in a double bill withGuess Who’s 
Coming to Dinner. The exploding of those buried myths, that’s the work the 
novel can do.”

But, he tells me, what he’d really like to do next is write a comic book for 
Marvel, having seen, with some envy, writers such as Ta-Nehisi Coates andRoxane 
Gay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/25/bad-feminist-roxane-grey-to-write-new-marvel-black-panther-series-world-of-wakanda>
 venture into comics. What he has in mind involves a rather obscure superhero: 
“Captain Britain needs a remodel, a reboot, and I think post-Brexit, an Asian 
Captain Britain would be good. So I’m just waiting for that invitation from 
Marvel.” Why doesn’t he ask? “You’re going to help me.” Sure I will. Marvel – 
come and get him.
 