
America's Next Top Model

9pm, Living TV


A chance to witness the spindle-thin wannabes doing stuff you've never seen 
them doing before. Apart from eating. Enjoy and enjoy again Rebecca's collapse, 
Michelle's skin disease and Tyra's tiff with Tiffany. And then there was Kahlen 
clearly releasing the pent up anger she feels towards her parents for giving 
her a made-up name.

 Julia Raeside Boston Legal

10pm, LivingTV


The final episode of the law show where all the cases are enjoyably absurd. 
Shatner, as always, seems to be acting in a different show from everyone else, 
while Spader explains his attraction to the Lone Star state's mechanical bull 
rides: "It would be like visiting Los Angeles and not sleeping with Paris 
Hilton."

 Phelim O'Neill

Films

Annie Hall (Woody Allen, 1977)

10pm, FilmFour


Neurotic twins Woody Allen and Diane Keaton are locked in a mad affair. Plenty 
of wonderful one-liners and visual gags, and slick Manhattan photography; he 
got the director's Oscar, she the actress's, and since the film is said to lay 
bare their failed relationship, they earned them.

 The Exorcist (William Friedkin, 1973)

10pm, Sci-Fi Channel


A strong contender for scariest movie ever made, this left audiences shaken 
and fearing for their immortal souls. Based on William Peter Blatty's novel - 
itself apparently prompted by an actual demonic possession - it has a grainily 
authentic look. It's hard to suppress a shiver as the camera edges up the 
stairs to Regan's room.

 Calendar Girls (Nigel Cole, 2003)

10.15pm, Sky Movies 1


 Based on the events surrounding the north Yorkshire WI branch that published 
a nude calendar of its members, this is the genteel ladies' version of The Full 
Monty. At the forefront are Julie Walters as Annie and Helen Mirren's Chris, 
who hit upon an unusual way of making a charitable memorial when Annie's 
husband dies of leukaemia.

 The Circle (Jafar Panahi, 2000)

4.25am, FilmFour


Panahi's fascinating drama, which won the Golden Lion in Venice and was banned 
by Tehran, is an unsparing account of oppressed women in modern Iran. From a 
mother in a maternity ward who lets the family down by producing a daughter, to 
a woman seeking an abortion and another who has to abandon the child she cannot 
support, this is a stark tale, shot edgily with handheld cameras in the back 
streets of Tehran, with a convincing non-professional cast.

 Paul Howlett

Sport

Live football

7.30pm, Sky Sports 1


Three weeks into the new season, Southampton should be coming to terms with 
life outside the Premiership following their recent relegation, but they might 
still find tonight difficult. The first round of the Carling Cup, from which 
top-flight sides are exempt, takes them to Southend, who have just been 
promoted to League One.

 Simon Burnton
 