
There are memorable episodes in the gestation of any big story: the breathless 
reporter arriving in the office with news of his or her catch, the fearsome 
legal threat landing in your inbox, the thrilling moment a scoop is unleashed 
into the world. For me though, the enduring, and still stomach-churning, memory 
from months of work on theWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> disclosures was the day I 
accidentally leaked the biggest leak in decades to the BBC's political editor, 
Nick Robinson.

If that sounds like an act of incompetence to rival putting 250,000 diplomatic 
cables on a database accessible by two million people, let me offer a few facts 
in mitigation.The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has 
its own Nick Robinson, a senior production journalist. One day in July I sent 
him an email detailing the final tweaks to the hush-hush project we had been 
preparing for weeks: 12 pages of reports based on 90,000 secret military logs 
of the war in Afghanistan. Only, the whizzy thing that guesses the email 
recipient picked the wrong Robinson. By the time I noticed, our world exclusive 
was winging its way to TV Centre.

Happily, the BBC's Robinson is one of journalism's gentlemen (a fact I've had 
cause to be grateful for more than once) and was editing a film when I caught 
up with him. He agreed to delete the unopened mail with the slightly strained 
suggestion that the time had come for me to remove him from my address book.

Like the MoD briefcase left on a train, the incident made a mockery of the 
already mildly comical measures we had been taking to keep the story out of 
sight of the governments we imagined might be keen to prevent its publication. 
For several weeks, editors at the five newspapers which collaborated on 
publication of the cables communicated largely via internet video chat 
services, periodically writing the numbers of particularly sensitive cables on 
pieces of paper and holding them up to the screen. Picture a cross between a 
Brussels committee on widget harmonisation and The Bourne Ultimatum and you 
have a rough idea of what it was like co-ordinating the plans of four European 
papers, theNew York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> 
and a peripatetic information guerrilla.

Communication with Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> himself was an even more 
cloak and dagger affair. After Swedish prosecutors sought an arrest warrant for 
him, he was reachable only via encrypted chat – and typically only late at 
night or in the small hours of the morning. These exchanges took on a Jason 
Bourne-ish quality: once he upbraided the Guardian for releasing too much data 
about the cables because he had been acquiring "good intel" as American 
diplomats went around the world, apologising for every slight they feared might 
be in the cache. (He was right: it turns out the US warned Downing Street about 
several infelicitous cables that WikiLeaks never had.)

Another time Assange announced, apropos of nothing in particular, that his 
lawyers were "being constantly surveilled (human)". When a number of cables 
popped up on a Lebanese newspaper website, he had several theories involving 
foreign intelligence agencies, although the newspaper partners thought it more 
likely that WikiLeaks had sprung a leak.

Despite the slight air of paranoia, Assange came across as ferociously 
intelligent, with a control freak's mastery of detail and an infectious 
enthusiasm for his information insurgency. Sometimes he would interrupt a 
conversation to rhapsodise about a particular cable. At times he had the 
detached air of a chess grandmaster playing a dozen games at once – later I 
found out that's because he was usually conducting numerous different chats 
simultaneously.

As the legal net closed around him, discussion of the cables gave way to his 
preoccupation with the Swedish sexual assault allegations. One night, shortly 
before he turned himself in to police, I asked why he didn't just return to 
Stockholm to answer the accusations. "The Swedish system is fucked," he 
replied. "The situation in Sweden is like a bad sci-fi movie. Forget everything 
you know about the common law system – we're dealing with the radical feminist 
version of Saudi Arabia."

With Assange himself becoming as big a story as his leaks, his relationship 
with the Guardian, already strained by a dispute over our decision to share the 
cables with the New York Times, became increasingly testy. When a copy of the 
police file in the Swedish case found its way to the Guardian's Nick Davies, 
the paper plainly had to publish a story on it. But the world's most famous 
champion of transparency didn't see it that way. Although we held the story for 
several days to give him a chance to respond, he instructed his lawyer to 
threaten legal action if we published.

From then on it was pretty much downhill. Perceived slight followed perceived 
slight: a production error that convinced him we were publishing a book about 
"the fall of WikiLeaks"; a Comment is Free contribution which blamed WikiLeaks 
(unfairly) for releasing a cable about Zimbabwe which some claimed put Morgan 
Tsvangirai at risk; and a (perfectly accurate) Guardian report about an 
unsavoury Holocaust denier's links to WikiLeaks.

By the start of this year, despite countless attempts at reassurance, Assange 
had decided the Guardian was out to get him. WikiLeaks now viewed the Guardian 
as akin to the Pentagon, he told me. As I write this, a WikiLeaks tweet rich 
with irony suggests the relationship may have chilled a few degrees since then: 
"The Guardian book serialisation contains malicious libels. We will be taking 
action."

The froideur between Assange and the Guardian is disappointing because, in so 
many ways, the collaboration over the leaked war logs and embassy cables was a 
model of what traditional media and the new breed of digital subversive can 
achieve together. Assange brought a trove of raw data and a considerable degree 
of savviness about how to work with vast, complex databases – and, not 
insignificantly, the ability to publish outside the reach of any individual 
jurisdiction. The Guardian and other media partners brought the old-fashioned 
journalistic skills and deep expertise required to figure out what mattered – 
and the resources (some 40 Guardian reporters worked on the cables alone) and 
commitment to deal with highly sensitive material responsibly.

Much has been written about the culture clash between what many in Wiki-world 
rather derisively call "mainstream media" and uncompromising information 
libertarians such as Assange. But if anything, I was struck by how the two 
cultures converged during the collaboration.

Assange started out as dismissive of the need to protect sources in the 
documents, and now effectively only publishes cables redacted by conventional 
media partners. As for the Guardian, we have undergone a crash course in 
working with massive databases, something which is sure to become a bigger part 
of what we do, and redoubled our commitment to an open, collaborative style of 
reporting. I have one more personal debt to WikiLeaks: I have finally taken 
(the wrong) Nick Robinson out of my address book.

Ian Katz is deputy editor of the Guardian
 