
Who has the worst job in television? Anne Widdecombe's dresser? The producers 
of Daybreak? No, not even close. Step forward, Ed Robinson, plucky young toiler 
for Sky Sports, assigned the task of interviewingAudley Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison> after Saturday's title 
fight in Manchester.

Think about it. Robinson has to go into the dressing room of a heavyweight 
boxer who has just seen his career, along possibly with several of his teeth, 
go down the toilet, and ask him what went wrong – as if we had not just seen. 
It was clearly a disconsolate, diminished heavyweight Robinson faced – you 
could tell that, because Audley Harrison forgot to refer to Audley Harrison in 
the third person – but still, when all is said and done, a heavyweight, while 
Robinson is built along very much more modest lines.

It is difficult to say for sure because our reporter was wearing a suit, but 
he struck me as closer to the "before" picture in the Charles Atlas advert 
(younger readers, ask your dad) than the finished article. With that in mind, 
it was an act of some bravery to respond to Harrison's analysis that David Haye 
"just caught me with a good shot", by suggesting it was more a case of the 
challenger being, er, quite frankly, rubbish.

"You were very negative, you just landed one jab in the whole fight," Robinson 
reminded his quarry, without the hint of a tremor in his voice. I admire that, 
because Harrison has seen off enough bus drivers, nightclub bouncers, and other 
journeymen in his glittering professional career to suggest that a young Sky 
reporter giving him grief could be decked without too much difficulty. Well, 
all right, maybe the jury is still out on that, but the possibility did not 
seem even to have occurred to our hero.

"Do you regret not going for it?" the intrepid Robinson asked (subtext: by 
throwing a punch or something), to which Harrison replied that his strategy had 
been to "keep stepping up" as the fight progressed, taking it into the later 
rounds where he might complete his mission, as he liked to put it. Oh yes, he 
did consider changing his game plan at one point: "When I got up and beat the 
count [in the third round], my mind kind of switched," said Harrison, giving a 
good impression of a man who briefly contemplated snapping shut the padlocks on 
the stable door, when the horse was already outside in the car park with his 
feet up, smoking a contemplative fag and shooting the breeze with a few of his 
mates.

Harrison was pathetic, in the sense of provoking feelings of pity. Anyone with 
a spark of humanity could not fail to be moved as the camera closed in on the 
bewildered figure slumped in the corner of his dressing room. You could almost 
forgive the bluster, the vainglory, all the third-person nonsense we have 
endured over the years, watching Harrison crumple before the unforgiving lens. 
That is the elemental nature of boxing. As Nigel Benn, interviewed before the 
fight, said: "There's no coming back for the loser."

In no other sport is every contest as career-defining as in the fight game. 
Seeing Harrison in that corner was like compressing two months of cutaways of 
Avram Grant or Roy Hodgson – if either lasts that long – looking glum and 
defeated on the sidelines into one three-minute interview. "He's somebody's 
father, somebody's husband, somebody's son," said former cruiserweight 
champion, now Sky pundit, Johnnie Nelson. "You've got to feel for the guy." 
Fellow pundit Barry McGuigan agreed, but added: "It's a terrible thing to say, 
but he's delusional and always has been. He never tried and that's been the 
story of his life."

The former featherweight champion then set about redefining irony for those of 
us who had shelled out £14.95 for the fight: "He's been a salesman for the past 
two weeks. He never fooled me. Let's be honest about this, totally honest. 
Because that's what we need. On a lot of these TV shows we don't tell the 
truth."

Now he tells us. Actually, you could watch TV for a lifetime without seeing 
hubris so movingly depicted. In that sense I do not begrudge the price of 
admission. It was drama at its bleakest. I used to think the coldest, most 
miserable place on earth was outside the Slots 'o' Fun amusement arcade in 
Cleethorpes on any weekday afternoon in November, but now I believe it may be 
Harrison's dressing room on Saturday night.
 