
Many people choose to do a master’s because they’re in love with the subject 
they studied at undergrad level, and want to go more deeply into it, perhaps 
with hopes of an academic career in the field. But equally, postgrad can be an 
opportunity to “pivot” – change direction from the path you set out on a few 
years ago and get on to a course with a career in mind.

You might have left uni and fallen into a job that you don’t find satisfying. 
Or perhaps you have a first degree in a subject that doesn’t lead directly to 
something and you now have a stronger idea of what career you want.

Postgrad courses are expensive, so you need to think your options through 
carefully: there might be other routes to setting you on your desired career 
path. But while there are no cast-iron guarantees, research does suggest that 
employers value postgraduate education. The Destinations of Leavers from Higher 
Education survey found that92% of graduates 
<https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/publications/higher-education-2014-15/introduction>
 leaving full-time postgraduate courses in 2014–15 were in work or further 
study six months after graduation, and 91% of those in work were in a 
professional 
<https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/publications/higher-education-2014-15/introduction>
occupation.

So, what do you need to consider when embarking on postgraduate study for a 
specific career?

Think about what’s important to you

Try to think strategically. I coach many people who want to change careers 
mid-life because they fell into something and became stuck. If you want to do 
something fulfilling, ask yourself: what exactly is it that motivates me? 
Understanding this is crucial.

'I hadn't read a book before prison – now I’m starting my PhD'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/16/masters-against-the-odds> 
For example, if you know you are motivated by making a difference to society, 
then an MSc in international development, human rights or sustainability could 
be up your street.

One of my clients worked for a few years as an administrator for an 
environmental think tank after leaving university, but felt he wasn’t 
progressing enough, even though he found the workplace very stimulating.

He wanted to be doing more practical work, so he started an MSc in outdoor 
environmental and sustainability education. He also organised a three-month 
voluntary project- manager role in Costa Rica at the end of the course.

You could call this his strategy: he’ll end up with practical experience as 
well as the qualification. He’ll be in an ideal position to apply for jobs on 
his return from Central America.

Set your sights on a goal

What do you want to be doing in five, or even 10, years’ time? It always helps 
to have a long-term goal at the back of your mind. It’ll make it much easier to 
know whether to say yes or no to opportunities that crop up while you are on 
the course – think about how they fit with your long-term goal.

Do your research on what questions the employers you are interested in need 
answering

This technique will help you stay focused. Another of my clients wanted to do 
an MA in the history of art with a view to getting a job as a curator at a 
gallery or museum.

But by thinking very long term, she realised that she ultimately wanted to be 
the director of somewhere like the Tate Modern. She understood this probably 
would not happen for many years, but her goal allowed her to see every expense 
and obstacle as stepping stones on her way.

Go in with a business idea 

Postgraduate courses are often used to train for a specific vocation: the 
graduate diploma in law, or the postgraduate certificate in education are 
common examples.

But increasingly, you can use a postgraduate course to give you the advice and 
the environment you need to nurture a business idea and launch it. The number 
of startups in the UKhit 608,110 in 2015 
<http://startupbritain.org/startup-tracker/> according to the campaign StartUp 
Britain, and the popularity of MScs in entrepreneurship and innovation is 
growing.

These offer a more applied approach to learning, to suit a more practical 
audience. You can gain the necessary knowledge and support before you launch 
your idea, which could provide a shortcut to business success.

Gain insider knowledge

A postgraduate qualification allows you to carve out a specialism in a way 
that makes you stand out. You could even think about choosing a dissertation 
topic that a potential employer will be interested in.

What's it really like to study for a postgrad degree in Europe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/09/whats-it-really-like-to-study-for-a-postgrad-degree-in-europe>
Do your research on what questions the employers you’re interested in might 
need answering. If this sounds difficult, consider a work placement: it will 
help you understand more easily what topics an employer would find intriguing.

Sue Moseley, a senior careers consultant at the University of London, says: 
“Think of your research and dissertation as a Trojan horse to get on the inside 
of the organisations you may want to work for. You could ask them for research 
participants, offer to present the findings to them, and make valuable 
contacts.”

Whatever course you choose, a postgraduate degree gives you the chance to make 
contacts through both the course itself and via your research, which will 
enable you to build networks in your field. Postgraduate qualifications aren’t 
essential, but you can use them to demonstrate a commitment to the topic and 
show that you’re extending your knowledge in a specific professional sector – 
which is a big plus when applying for jobs.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 