 The investigation into the American Airlines crash is likely to focus on 
establishing whether it was caused by a catastrophic mechanical failure or a 
maintenance error, aviation safety experts said last night.
As teams from the US National Transportation Safety Board arrived at the crash 
scene to begin their investigation, the initial evidence pointed away from the 
theory that flight 587 was brought down by a terrorist attack.

US observers said it was significant that the board, the civilian crash 
investigation agency, and not the FBI, had been named as the lead agency to 
find out what happened to the Airbus A300 after take-off from JFK.

The White House stressed that there were no "abnormal communications" from the 
jet before it crashed into Queens, New York. Among aviation experts, the 
initial view was not pointing to terrorist activity.

ABC News reported yesterday that extra security measures since September 11 
meant that every bag on Flight 587 was "attached" to a passenger, lessening the 
chance that a bag could have been smuggled into the hold by a terrorist. 
Neither was it carrying any cargo or mail.

Dozens of eyewitness reports agree that one of the jet's two engines became 
detached from the jet before it crashed.

One pilot told the Guardian last night: "We can cope with a simple engine 
failure or fire. I suspect there was much more involved, it must have been a 
massive mechanical failure or a very serious fire rooted in the wing, but that 
is such a rare event."

The A300's two General Electric engines are housed in pods and attached to 
pylons on the wings. Reports suggested last night that the wing was on fire 
before the crash. If correct, the job for investigators will be to find out 
whether it caused, or was caused by, a mechanical failure.

Geoff Ratcliffe, chairman of the Royal Aeronautical Society's airworthiness 
and maintenance group and a former head of operations with British Airways, 
said it was possible that the engine had been sheered off by a major mechanical 
failure.

"A complete seizure of the engine or a failure in the combustion chamber 
could, in theory, cause the pod to drop off," he said. "Any violent reaction 
can cause the pylon attachment to come off, although these events are extremely 
rare."

That in itself would not have been enough to cause the jet to crash as they 
are designed to be flown with only one engine.

 Wing damage


"The engine coming off would be controllable, not a thing you would like to 
happen but still controllable," Mr Ratcliffe said. "It shouldn't nosedive into 
the ground, so that means that there must have been damage to the wing, perhaps 
as the engine came off, and that would have made the plane unflyable."

He suggested a possible parallel between yesterday's crash and the loss of an 
El Al Boeing 747 cargo plane which crashed into an apartment block after 
take-off from Schipol airport in Amsterdam in 1992.

The plane was climbing through 6,500ft when the number three engine separated 
from the aircraft, damaging the leading edge of the right wing. As it detached, 
it also caused the number four engine to come off. The pilot attempted to 
return to the airport, but lost control and ploughed into the flats.

An investigation into that crash established that a maintenance error was to 
blame. The separation of the number three engine had been caused by corrosion 
in a pin fixing the pylon to the wings.

David Learmont, operations and safety editor of Flight International magazine, 
agreed. "If you have a catastrophic engine failure, it could cause the engine 
to detach from the wing. It's not impossible but it's highly unlikely, which 
leaves us with some kind of maintenance error, in fixing the engine onto the 
pylon or fixing the pylon back onto the wing. The engines are taken off 
occasionally for maintenance, so that has to be a possibility."

Mr Learmont said the condition of the detached engine undermined the theory 
that it had been severely damaged by an explosion or a fire.

"Judging by the television pictures, the engine looks pretty good considering 
it just hit the ground at 200mph. There is hardly a scratch on the cowling."

That is why the investigators will be looking closely at the airline's 
maintenance records.

The company revealed last night that the plane, tailnumber N-14053, had 
entered service as brand new in July 1988, and had not been due for a major 
overhaul until July.

The port engine had performed just 694 hours of flying since its last 
overhaul, while the starboard engine had done 9,788 hours. Engines should be 
overhauled, on average, every 10,000 hours.

It remains unclear if it was the port or starboard engine that fell off. 

"Many things could have caused the engine to come off - an explosion, a fire 
in the fuel or a maintenance problem," said Doug Birch, managing editor of Air 
Transport Publications, which publishes specialist airline maintenance 
magazines.

"But what I find very strange was that there was no talk between the pilot and 
air traffic control. If there was an engine problem he would have reported it. 
That points more towards a maintenance problem. The aircraft is 13 years old 
but American Airlines have a very reputable maintenance record."

The National Transportation Safety Board may look to the past inquiries to 
help its present investigation, including an incident in 1998 where the US 
safety watchdogs blamed maintenance errors and American Airlines for a fire in 
an engine that forced an Airbus to make an emergency landing shortly after 
take-off from Santa Cruz, Puerto Rico.

The engine on the Airbus - exactly the same type fitted on the plane in 
yesterday's tragedy - caught fire but was spotted by the crew just after 
take-off, said the board report.

The report found that a fault had developed with the fuel lines, allowing 
pressurised fuel to "spray onto hot engine parts and ignite".

The board said in a preliminary report that the likely cause was failure by 
both the engine overhaul facility in Hanover, Germany, and American Airlines to 
ensure the installation of the correct adapter bolt to prevent fuel leakage.

Furthermore the pilots returned to San Juan mistakenly believing that the fire 
in the port engine was out.

This led the board to recommend that an airworthiness directive be issued to 
boost fire detection systems. Federal Aviation Authority records reveal that it 
issued the directive.

The emergency evacuation of the 224 passengers and crew left 28 people nursing 
minor injuries.
 