
You can tell something has been going on in Monaco - other than the absurdity 
of a so-called Super Cup being played on a pitch above a car park in a country 
with no football fans - becauseMichel Platini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/michel-platini> has been speaking.

If the Uefa president occasionally sounds sensible it is usually because the 
only point of comparison is Fifa's even more preposterous Sepp Blatter. Platini 
is businesslike and down-to-earth, still has plenty of goodwill and admiration 
in the bank from his days as a player, and only has to remember to steer clear 
of calling Cristiano Ronaldo a slave or campaigning for women to wear tighter 
shorts to come across as the acceptable face of Swiss-based international 
football administration.

It doesn't mean Platini talks sense though, not by a long way. Uefa are 
hopelessly compromised as an organisation by the influence and interests of the 
big clubs and richer nations, and while Platini made certain promises to 
Europe's lesser lights on his way to power the story of his presidency has been 
an inability to bring about any significant changes other than the token 
disbandment of the G-14 pressure group. Even that was not as significant as it 
first appeared. Initially set up by the leading clubs from the seven most 
successful countries, G-14's purpose was simply to remind Uefa that unless it 
delivered exactly what was wanted, a breakaway league was always a possibility. 
It might have been more fun watching them trying to carry out that threat than 
watching some of the boring revisions theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> went through in order to 
guarantee all concerned enough money, but due to having achieved more or less 
what it wanted, voluntarily dissolved on Platini's accession and the president 
in turn promised to work more closely with the big clubs. Plus ça change

Still, at least the Champions League is about the right size and shape now, 
even if four clubs from the same country is way too many and the Uefa Cup is 
now little more than an irritating afterthought. If Platini can sort that out, 
which he initially said he was going to do, then there would be less inequality 
within domestic leagues and probably no need to launch an inquiry into club 
debts. Platini has gone as far as to suggest clubs are 'cheating' when they 
sign players on credit that they cannot really afford, yet surely he must see 
that Champions League wealth has left clubs on the outside with only two 
options. Stick or twist. Take a punt or put up with mediocrity. Platini is 
right in saying there have always been rich and poor clubs, and he is powerless 
to prevent the sort of distortion Roman Abramovich's spending has brought about 
in thePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, 
though the challenge for Uefa is to use the Champions League to promote healthy 
competition between the best clubs in Europe rather than acting as a cartel to 
define them.

At the moment clubs in England, say, cannot be blamed for 'cheating'. The top 
four represents almost a quarter of the league, and roughly another quarter - 
Spurs, Villa, Everton and Newcastle for example - feel they ought to be able to 
have a crack at it. So they should, yet each season in the Champions League 
rearms a club for the next and sets the bar higher for everyone else. If no 
country could send more than two teams into the Champions League there would be 
much better competition between the big four themselves, not just the same 
names going through each year, and clubs lower down the league would take a 
much more realistic view of their chances of breaking in. That may sound 
restrictive, but the balance Platini seeks could be restored by souping up the 
Uefa Cup into something worth winning, something competed for by big names on 
big match-nights that would create revenue for clubs rather than costing them 
money, and that may act as ideal preparation for a crack at the Champions 
League the following season.

The current inferior status of the Uefa Cup is why the Super Cup is such a 
daft idea. Who cares? There is too great a disparity between Uefa's two main 
competitions and one of them is responsible for too great a disparity between 
haves and have-nots in most domestic leagues. This is not rocket science, Mr 
Platini, though perhaps we should not expect too much of a man who awards a 
Champion League final to Rome, whose police simply don't deserve it, then warns 
spectators to be on their best behaviour. A little late, Platini also joined in 
the debate over Ronaldo's summer behaviour. 'He did the right thing,' he said. 
'When you have signed a contract you don't break it.' Good to know someone's 
got their eyes open.

Uncomfortable truth of the zone

What did people used to do before we had comfort zones? They used to do their 
jobs, that's what. They either worked well or poorly, were rewarded 
accordingly, and looked elsewhere if for any reason they weren't happy with the 
bargain.

Not any longer. Now it is almost a crime to be happy in your work or settled 
at a club because it means you are sitting in a comfort zone. That's a bad 
thing, in case you hadn't realised. It means, in another of football's great 
oversimplifications, that you lack ambition.

Why Manchester City's executive chairman is trying to needle Mark Hughes so 
early on in the pair's working relationship is unclear, but Garry Cook knew 
what would make his manager bristle. 'He'd rather sign players he knows, even 
overpay,' Cook said of Hughes. 'He doesn't like the unknown because it takes 
him out of his comfort zone.'

Never mind that Hughes at Blackburn had an exemplary record with 'unknown' 
players such as Roque Santa Cruz, Christopher Samba, Ryan Nelsen and Andre 
Ooijer, the new City manager duly bristled. 'It is very easy to sit in your 
comfort zone but I don't think I have done that either as a player or a 
manager,' he said. 'I have deliberately put myself in different positions 
throughout my career.'

Can we stop this now, please? Hughes sounds like an uncomfortable cross 
between Mark Wahlberg pitching for his role in Boogie Nights and Sam Allardyce 
using Prozone to put a CV together. One doubts whether Hughes chose to play 
centre-forward for Manchester United, Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Chelsea just 
to boost his ego, it was much more the case that the clubs chose him. Similarly 
no one expected him to be manager of Wales for the rest of his life. Moving on, 
and hopefully up, is what managers do.

If we are not careful we will end up looking down on decent footballers and 
loyal clubmen because they never had the get up and go to reach a Champions 
League final. We will have no choice but to applaud such players as Gareth 
Barry and Dimitar Berbatov for straining to break out of their comfort zones 
while at the same time moaning that the Premier League is dominated by two or 
three clubs. If we are unable to alter the reality we can at least amend the 
language. Comfort zone may be a useful concept for endurance athletes in 
training, but it makes a sloppy crossover to football, where perhaps it should 
only be applied to Chelsea's non-playing reserves. That was where Winston 
Bogarde pioneered the most comfortable zone of all, though Shaun 
Wright-Phillips, thank goodness, has decided to start playing again. 'A 
fantastic coup forManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>,' Hughes proclaimed. 
Wright-Phillips could have toughed it out at Chelsea but chose to return to the 
club he knows best. 'City is where I want to play, where I feel comfortable and 
where I know the people love me,' he explained. Let's just say amen to that, 
and to hell with comfort zones.

Famagusta gusto is just what Champions League needs

Strictly speaking we should disapprove of teams such as Anorthosis Famagusta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anorthosisfamagusta> taking their place 
in the Champions League group stages, because while the FA Cup does romance, it 
is not what Europe's glamour tournament is all about.

On the other hand, what is the Champions League all about? If it is simply to 
make prodigious sums of money through television rights for the richest clubs 
in Europe, then I for one don't mind upstart Cypriots trying to upstage José 
Mourinho. Anorthosis eliminated Rapid Vienna and Olympiakos to come this far, 
so they are in Group B by right.

And they are coached by Temuri Ketsbaia, the distinctive chrome dome who 
played for Newcastle in that thrilling 3-2 win over Barcelona 11 years ago, not 
to mention encountering Mark Viduka playing for Croatia Zagreb and Dynamo 
Kiev's then youthful partnership of Sergei Rebrov and Andriy Shevchenko. Best 
of all, Anorthosis have a chairman, Andreas Pantelis, who has just distributed 
a €1m bonus among the squad and confirmed he will continue to travel to matches 
on the team bus. 'Never mind the coach, I will travel by bicycle if need be,' 
Pantelis has said.

Perhaps not the new Crazy Gang, but plucky outsiders worth watching out for. 
Liverpool must be mightily relieved to have avoided them.
 