
After finishing my studies at Kew, in 1986, I spent about five years moving 
around: a year at Jerusalem Botanic Garden, a year a mile up a dirt track on 
Miriam Rothschild's wild and woolly estate, and time out on the Norfolk Fens. I 
had plans with my partner at the time to buy a field on the Milford Haven 
estuary, where we intended to live on our houseboat and make a garden, but when 
my garden design business started to take off, I found myself inching back to 
London. I was 27 and in love again, which is how I came to live on Bonnington 
Square, in south London.

The first time I saw the square I knew I wanted to live there. There was a 
party house with no floors, children running barefoot in the street, a cast of 
local characters who were the definition of bohemian and the Bonnington Square 
Café, which is still run on a vegetarian co-operative basis. Friends dropped in 
with no notice and frequently stayed until dawn, and the boundaries between 
where you lived and where you spent your time were constantly blurred. One 
summer morning I awoke to find the outside of the house opposite had been 
papered from top to bottom in newspaper. Visitors often said it was like 
stepping back in time.

Although the Harleyford Road Community Garden on the other side of the square 
existed when I arrived, the greening of the square had now started. Cracks in 
the pavements had been dug out and planted up by the local guerrilla gardeners, 
and odd corners were already colonised. I had just been for the first time to 
New York, where I was inspired by the Operation Green Thumb community gardens 
on the Lower East Side. The same sense of a community working to improve its 
surroundings set the square apart from the roaring traffic of Vauxhall Cross, 
and that community has gone on to develop as one of my favourite gardens in 
central London.

My roof garden overlooked the site where this garden was created; an area 
seven houses long that was bombed during the war. A chain-link fence surrounded 
the site, which had been turned into a children's playground in the Seventies, 
with a broken slide and dilapidated swing sitting on a pad of dog-soiled 
concrete. Although someone had planted a lone walnut tree, bindweed and 
buddleia had won the day.

In 1990 a builder asked the council for permission to store equipment on the 
wasteground, which alerted locals to the potential for development interest in 
this area of open ground. Fast as lightning, Evan English, one of my 
neighbours, proposed that the site should be turned into a community garden. 
With a core group of residents behind him, he struck lucky with a local 
councillor who had one of the last GLC grants to give out to such a project. 
So, with just over £20,000 in our pockets and a team of council-appointed 
landscape architects, we put in the bones of the new garden.

The chain link was replaced with railings, the tarmac and concrete with 
hoggin, and a series of raised beds created with topsoil spread over the 
basements of the old houses. A giant slip wheel, salvaged from the defunct 
local marble works, was partially reassembled to add a dramatic sculptural 
element. Another resident, the New Zealand garden designer James Frazer, and I 
put together the planting scheme and had a lot of fun mixing architectural New 
Zealand natives and English garden staples. A massive planting day that first 
autumn was followed by another party. None of this could have happened without 
Evan's single-mindedness, and once the momentum was up, so was the support of 
the community. There was an annual street fair to raise additional funds for 
plants and furniture, and monthly workdays to keep the garden looking its best.

The square was given an entirely new focus with a garden at its core and 
created a renewed sense of pride among the residents. It was then given its 
official name, the Bonnington Square Pleasure Garden, partly a reference to the 
notorious 17th-century Vauxhall PleasureGardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens>, partly because it had been 
a pleasure to create and was intended to be a pleasure to use. Life on the 
square had changed. The picnic lawn was busy every weekend, and we saw people 
who had never ventured from their houses using the park as an extension of 
their homes.

The following year came the Paradise Project, a plan to green the streets 
around the square. We were given more help with funds for trees, and soon 
catalpas, Judas trees, mimosa and arbutus took to the pavements - and climbers 
to the walls of anyone who wanted to green their building. People quickly 
started to plant up the pavements in front of their houses. Window boxes of 
herbs and flowers appeared, old telegraph poles were colonised by morning glory 
and vines, and a rash of roof gardens appeared, so I was no longer alone in my 
green eyrie.

It is more than 10 years since I left the square to make a garden of my own, 
but the Pleasure Garden has continued to evolve with the community, which is 
still very much behind it. A new generation of gardeners - many of whom had 
never gardened before moving there - keep it feeling vital. It is an object 
lesson in what can be achieved when people join forces to stop so-called 
'wasteland' being lost to yet more bricks and mortar.

If you can visit the square (bonningtonsquaregarden.org.uk 
<http://www.bonningtonsquaregarden.org.uk>) today, as part of the London Open 
Garden Squares weekend (opensquares.org <http://www.opensquares.org>), you'll 
see just how good it is. May it inspire the guerrilla gardeners among you to 
team up, green the streets and improve the quality of life in our cities.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>
 