
I have blogged before about the creepy phenomenon whereby actors who made a 
brilliant impression with great performances around 10 or 15 years or so ago, 
got rewarded with Hollywood careers which crushed the life out of them, and 
made them bland and dull.Eric Bana, who made his sensational debut in the 
Australian crime drama Chopper (2000) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2009/aug/27/eric-bana-funny-people-chopper>
, then bafflingly devoted himself to much more boring roles.

This week, I have experienced this phenomenon in a devastating, triple-whammy 
form. Owen Wilson,Aaron Eckhart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart>
 and Naomi Watts, who have been so good in some great films, this week served 
up zombie-acting, sleepwalk-acting, going-though-the-motions acting. Are they 
tired? Are they just taking the paycheque? Is it the script that's awful? Here 
is this week's tripartite nightmare …

Owen Wilson in Hall Pass, directed by the Farrelly Brothers

It's a pretty awful comedy, tired, almost contemptuously lazy, without any of 
the Farrellys' inspired black humour. Wilson has to play a basically nice, 
married, middle-aged guy who still lusts after women, the sort of role that 
could go to Kevin James, if you want to play up his corpulence, or maybe Jason 
Bateman, if disillusion is the important thing. But all of Wilson's funky, 
goofy shtick is nowhere. It's just uncomfortable – and wrong. For contrast, put 
on the DVD of Wes Anderson's Bottle Rocket (1996), an off-the-wall comedy which 
Anderson co-wrote with Wilson, who co-stars with his brother Luke. Right there 
is the spark, the fun, the likability and the sheer individuality ofOwen Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/owenwilson>, all the things which gave him 
his career. After some great stuff in Zoolander and Meet the Parents, and some 
great voice work in the animations Cars and The Fantastic Mr Fox, well, all of 
his charm seems to have fallen away. The nadir (I hope) is Hall Pass. Can't Mr 
Wilson sit down to watch Bottle Rocket and resolve to get back to his roots?

Aaron Eckhart in Battle: Los Angeles, directed by Jonathan Liebesman

Eckhart plays a Marine sergeant, a straight-up handsome, rugged, all-American 
male. Standard-issue beefcake, albeit an older guy. Nothing out of the ordinary 
or interesting about Eckhart here in any way at all. People who see this film, 
and know nothing of Eckhart's career may not know that he made an extraordinary 
breakthrough in Neil LaBute's satirical nightmare In The Company of Men (1997). 
Aaron Eckhart plays a boorish corporate executive who sets out to destroy the 
life of a hearing-impaired woman in his office, by dating her and dumping her — 
out of pure misogynist hate. Eckhart's performance was electrifying. "Evil" is 
a word used casually in the movies, but he is evil, there's just no other word. 
Eckhart was booed and barracked by women at screenings and Q&As, perhaps 
because they thought Eckhart was relishing the performance too much. But he was 
brilliant. I suspect he may have spent his subsequent career living down that 
creation. Can he ever tap into that dark inspiration again?

Naomi Watts in Fair Game, directed by Doug Liman


This is probably the most painful comedown of all. Watts gives a performance 
of egregious blandness, in a film whose smug awfulness I shall discuss in depth 
later this week. This role is just not worthy of her. You just have to remember 
her glorious breakthrough in David Lynch's Mulholland Drive, as the young 
wannabe screen star. Her dual "audition" scene is quite enough on its own to 
earn Naomi Watts her star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame – when she first 
wittily runs through her piece for her friend, and then later, when it comes to 
doing it for real, takes it to the next level with a passionate, brilliant 
reading. Mulholland Drive was what putNaomi Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/naomi-watts> on the map, but nothing since 
then has been anywhere near as good.

Well, it's not entirely fair to blame the actors, who have to work. The system 
rewards dullness. But instead of seeing Hall Pass, Battle: Los Angeles or Fair 
Game, you might be better off watching or re-watching Bottle Rocket, In the 
Company of Men and Mulholland Drive.
 