
On 15 October, Ada Lovelace Day <http://findingada.com/> marked the annual 
celebration of women's achievements in science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics. Ada Lovelace (1815-1852) was agifted mathematician 
<http://www.biography.com/people/ada-lovelace-20825323> and pioneer theorist of 
artificial intelligence. As the daughter of Lord Byron, perhaps she should also 
represent the host of science-inspired poets now enriching our cultural 
ecosystem? A significant number of these are women, among them Anne Stevenson, 
who was mining that particular seam long before today's gold rush. In this 
week's poem, "The Miracle of the Bees and the Foxgloves" from her newest 
Bloodaxe collection,Astonishment 
<http://www.bloodaxebooks.com/titlepage.asp?isbn=1852249471>, it's the 
intricacies offoxglove pollination 
<http://botanical.com/botanical/mgmh/f/foxglo30.html> which fascinate her.

"See Darwin's pages on his foxglove summers" the fourth line advises, an 
elegant footnote incorporated into the poem's text. The pages can be found in 
Charles Darwin's 1876 study,The Effects of Cross- and Self-Fertilisation in the 
Vegetable Kingdom <http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/4346/pg4346.txt>. In his 
section on Digitalis purpurea (L), or Common Foxglove, Darwin stresses that 
it's only "the larger humble-bees" which participate in the plant's 
fertilisation. So the sonnet begins with a reminder of that conclusion, 
translated into glowing metaphor: "Because hairs on their speckled daybeds 
baffle the little bees,/ Foxgloves hang out their shingles for rich bumbling 
hummers …" Darwin's "humble-bee" and the more familiar term, bumblebee, 
cross-fertilise to produce "rich bumbling hummers", a description encapsulating 
the insect's sounds, movement and cushiony, gilded plumpness. The relationship 
of foxglove to bee is densely honeycombed with metaphors of seduction. The 
flowers are "speckled daybeds" and "tunnels-of-delight". Plied with nectar, the 
client-bees visit "every hooker" in an intoxicated ecstasy.

The word "hooker" has a function beyond the metaphorical. Inside the foxglove 
flower are hairs which, like small hooks, help the bee gain footholds as it 
climbs. For the reader, internal rhymes imitate the effect. "Hooker", for 
example, leads to a near-rhyme with "liquor" at the end of line six. In the 
previous line "heckles" (a form of "hackles"), also denoting an uneven surface, 
similarly connects in an internal near-rhyme with "speckled". The "k" sounds 
add thickness to the summery weight of "um" sounds. But the last line of the 
septet introduces a pragmatic note amid sensory entrancement. The nectar-lure 
has evolutionary purpose – to keep the foxglove from "propagating in a corner 
with itself". Darwin's comparative studies showed that cross-fertilised plants 
were frequently healthier than the self-fertilised.

Stevenson restructures the harmonious machinery of the sonnet into two 
septets, adding a further refinement, a (mostly) seven-beat line. A little 
lighter on internal rhymes, though still finding delicate inner sound patterns, 
the second septet maintains and develops the sexual drama. The anthers "let 
fly" their pollen prematurely, and "Along swims bumbler bee and makes an 
undercoat of this". The nicknaming informality here adds piquancy to the poet's 
voice, and generates a shared creaturely warmth. Darwin's own language is 
anthropomorphic at times, with words like "carry", "crawl", "footholds", 
"ease". The poem's linguistic abundance makes room for everyday domestic nouns 
like "daybeds" and "undercoat", faintly slangy idioms and the naturalist's 
precise vocabulary ("anthers", "dehisc", "Digitalis") when necessary.

The task of the poet as science-writer is not simply to dramatise unadorned 
narrative with figurative but subtly exact "lay" observations, but to visualise 
"bigger-picture" analogies. Here, for example, the consummation when "ripeness 
climbs the bells of Digitalis flower by flower" seems to mirror and expand the 
earlier movements of the bee as it mounts the individual foxglove corollae.

The last line is cunningly placed. The reader may have relished a vision of 
"design" and "desire" (which necessitate some sort of originating "mind") in 
the relations between bees and flowers. The poem's title adverted to a 
"miracle", in fact. Now the scientist in the poet might seem to be throwing 
cold water on those satisfying and beautiful elaborations. But this would be a 
misunderstanding, I think. What the poem is saying all along is that the real 
miracle is that such a perfectly functioning system has evolved without design. 
It's a reminder that Creationism doesn't simply deny the science – it betrays 
its wonder.

The Miracle of the Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> and the 
Foxgloves

Because hairs on their speckled daybeds baffle the little bees,
Foxgloves hang their shingles out for rich bumbling hummers,
Who crawl into their tunnels-of-delight with drunken ease
(See Darwin's pages on his foxglove summers)
Plunging over heckles caked with sex-appealing stuff,
To sip from every hooker an intoxicating liquor
That stops it propagating in a corner with itself.

And this is how the foxglove keeps its sex life in order.
Two anthers – adolescent, in a hurry to dehisce –
Let fly too soon, so pollen lies in drifts about the floor.
Along swims bumbler bee and makes an undercoat of this,
Reverses, exits, lets it fall by accident next door.
So ripeness climbs the bells of Digitalis flower by flower,
Undistracted by a mind, or a design, or by desire.
 