
Truly remarkable. Less than a year ago Rafael Nadal was regarded as the 
Spanish clay-court specialist who would be hard pressed to win a major title on 
any surface other than theterre battue of the French Open. Now, with his 
prodigious victory over Roger Federer in theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final, he joins Andre 
Agassi as the only player in the past 24 years to have won a grand slam on each 
of the outdoor surfaces: clay, grass and hard.

Last July, by beating Federer in that epic Wimbledon final, Nadal confounded 
the theory that with a game made for clay he could never win on the skiddy 
grass courts of the All England Club. And now, in his first grand slam final on 
a hard court, he has succeeded where no Spaniard has before by winning the 
Australian Open with a thrilling 7–5, 3–6, 7–6 , 3–6, 6-2 victory over Federer, 
who remains stalled on 13 major titles, one behind Pete Sampras's record.

Nadal's tally now stands at six grand slams – four French, one Wimbledon and 
one Australian – and in all but the first of these, the 2005 French when he 
beat Mariano Puerta to take the title, the player he has beaten in the final 
has been Federer.

"I have always liked the competition more than the tennis," Nadal, 22, said 
recently, and maybe here we have the key to today's result and all those other 
victories over the Swiss master. Although it must be a difficult choice, you 
suspect Federer prefers the tennis to the competition – and why wouldn't he 
with a game as polished and beautiful as his?

Sheer combative will saw Nadal through in a match in which the odds were 
heaped against him, not only because of Federer's hard-court pedigree but 
because of the soreness he must still have felt after spending more than five 
hours either side of midnight on Friday and Saturday winning his semi-final 
against a fellow Spaniard, Fernando Verdasco.

More specifically, the consistency of Nadal's groundstrokes, in their 
brutality and accuracy, did for Federer in what was a desperately tight match 
until the No2 seed, the winner at Melbourne in 2004, 2006 and 2007, ran out of 
steam as the match entered its fifth hour.

In keeping with the standard practice, Nadal applied pressure throughout on 
the Federer backhand – and when the Spaniard applies pressure it comes close to 
contravening the Geneva Convention. Federer, knowing what to expect, withstood 
it grimly, but in the end it was all too much.

Of course there was much else to admire from the Spaniard, not least the sheer 
resourcefulness of coming to his first hard-court final in a grand slam and 
managing to upstage one of the great masters of the surface. He was far more 
aggressive than against Verdasco, when he was content to trade rallies from way 
behind the baseline. Now he looked for every opportunity to keep them as short 
as possible, even on occasions involving himself in volleying exchanges close 
to the net (which usually ended with him being handed a reminder he should go 
off on do more work on is volley).

Federer made an inauspicious start, mis-hitting three times in the first game 
to drop serve. His play remained uneven for the rest of the set. Although he 
surged ahead 4–2 with two breaks of his own, he was destabilised by a furious 
fightback by Nadal. Behind 2-4 and 15-30 on the Federer serve, Nadal pulled out 
brilliant winners with a flicked forehand and backhand across court that so 
deflated his opponent that he ceded the point – and mastery of the opening set 
– with a double fault.

Invariably when faced with a crisis – or a mini-crisis, as it was at this 
early stage – Federer responds by rediscovering his best form. At 2-3 he was a 
break behind in the second set and his game was spluttering ominously. Cue a 
complete turnaround with Federer dominating the remainder of the set, as his 
groundstrokes finally started to flow, to level the match.

The third set was key for although Nadal, having pick-pocketed it in a 
tiebreak after saving six break points in his last two service games, then 
conceded the fourth set, he was to prove the stronger player in the decider, 
despite his exertions against Verdasco.
 