 Police on both sides of the Irish border are trying to establish if four 
brothers being treated in a Dublin hospital are linked to an arson attack on a 
couple in County Armagh.
Lisa McClatchey and her partner, Thomas O'Hare, were doused in petrol and set 
alight at their home near the southArmagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh> border village of Keady on Monday night.

Ms McClatchey is critically ill in hospital after fleeing the house in flames, 
while Mr O'Hare was pulled from the burning wreckage in agony by neighbours. 
His condition is serious but stable.

Detectives are examining the possible involvement of four brothers, who are 
said to be in a critical condition in a Dublin hospital. The brothers appeared 
an hour after the attack at a hospital across the border in Dundalk, County 
Louth.

The men, understood to be from the south Armagh area and aged between 24 and 
34, were transferred to the burns unit at St James' hospital in Dublin for 
specialist treatment.

But with none of them in any condition to talk, police were preparing 
themselves for a lengthy inquiry.

Up to six men were seen entering the home. The police are searching for two 
other men. They have not ruled out the involvement of self-styled vigilantes.

Sources close to the investigation also confirmed that police believe at least 
two other people know exactly what happened when the gang went into the house.

The police service of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> (PSNI) said it was standard 
practice, given the intensity of the fire, for officers to check hospitals for 
people who had been admitted with burns.

"That is precisely what is being carried out in this case, in consultation 
with the Garda," said a spokeswoman.

Police investigating the horrific attack have ruled out a sectarian or racist 
motive, but said they were following a definite line of inquiry. They said some 
sort of paramilitary involvement was a possibility.

Mr O'Hare had been living at the scene of the attack for some time. He is 
understood to have separated from his wife, the mother of his two children, 
three years ago.

His girlfriend, Ms McClatchey, is the granddaughter, through marriage, of the 
late Harold Gracey, the Orange Order leader at the centre of the Drumcree 
marching protest in Portadown, County Armagh.

Detective Chief Inspector David McConville, the officer in charge of the PSNI 
investigation, said that burning was an unusual and vicious crime.

He said: "It has to be said that no one has the right to act as judge and 
jury, if that was the motive, and certainly we would call on the public to help 
us identify these people.

"There are six vicious men out there who have attacked two vulnerable people 
in the sanctity of their own home."
 