
The Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> should 
introduce youth justice and diversionary programs in Aboriginal communities so 
that low offenders can be disciplined and rehabilitated without being locked up 
thousands of kilometres away, political leaders have been told.

Less than 24 hours after they took to a Darwin stage in suits for a televised 
debate, the NT chief minister,Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-giles>, and the opposition 
leader, Michael Gunner, stood in a hot bush clearing near Kalkarindji, sweating 
through their cotton shirts.

The joint meeting of the Central and Northern Land Councils, which had been 
held there, had already discussed what was to be put to the visiting leaders. 
The election was a little more than a week away. The lists were written on huge 
yellow pages and pinned to boards.

Giles was first. People were angry about the Don Dale detention centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/activists-gather-at-don-dale-detention-centre-to-demand-release-of-young-boys>
 and the treatment of young children – mostly Indigenous. Some said they were 
already aware of the violence before the Four Corners program on ABC, and they 
pleaded for a change to the system in which their young people made up 96% of 
the inmates.

Mildred Inkamala suggested that the youth locked up for minor offences should 
be brought back to the country, and that diversionary or corrections programs 
should be run among their families and communities.

“Maybe the high risk mob, they can stay ...” she began.

“But treated as equals,” an older man yelled out.

Activists gather at Don Dale detention centre to demand boys' release
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/activists-gather-at-don-dale-detention-centre-to-demand-release-of-young-boys>
“We got family in the prison there. I understand they’ve been stealing and 
breaking into houses, but we want more programs at home,” Inkamala said.

Giles said he would take the suggestion on board, but “it’s probably best that 
I leave it to the royal commission to take a look at new ways of youth 
detention ... and maybe that is going out to the community and doing that”.

Another spoke of the violence in their communities, especially among children.

“We want our discipline rights back ... little children are getting involved, 
carrying weapons, and we don’t want to see them end up in Don Dale ... we need 
to discipline our own kids.”

Some of the delegates had spoken with the royal commissioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/mick-gooda-and-margaret-white-to-lead-royal-commission-into-nt-juvenile-detention>
 who had visited the previous day. There was concern the tentative March 
reporting date would not offer enough time to get to the heart of the problem, 
but they were told the commissioners could ask for more time if needed.

One man brought up Giles’ recently resurfaced comments from 2010 that if he 
had been corrections minister he would “build a big concrete hole and put all 
the bad criminals in there” even if he broke United Nations conventions.

Giles apologised, and said the comments came from frustration with the 
government at the time.

Others spoke of jobs, again to keep young people out of trouble but also to 
provide real and meaningful employment.

“We want to work for real money, instead of dole money,” said one man.

“We want to get decent jobs but we’re being treated like mission times”.

Mick Gooda and Margaret White to lead royal commission into NT juvenile 
detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/mick-gooda-and-margaret-white-to-lead-royal-commission-into-nt-juvenile-detention>
Giles said he could not promise to give everyone a job but improving housing 
and the economy was a big part of creating real jobs in communities.

Barbara Shaw, from one of Alice Springs’ town camps, said the Community 
Development Program money “can’t even pay the rent”, and they wanted real jobs 
such as more Indigenous ranger positions.

“That’s the best place for our people to look after our country,” she said.
“Climate change is coming, and no government has ever started to address 
climate change. Water is scarce for us in the desert.”

The federal Indigenous affairs minister, Nigel Scullion, revealed later in the 
meetinga commitment of ranger funding up to 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/indigenous-rangers-receive-commonwealth-funding-commitment-to-2020>
, and said increases would be considered.

Giles took questions for more than 40 minutes. He was followed by Gunner, who 
was introduced to the crowd with the instruction: “you can flog him now”.

Gunner noted Labor’s role in land rights history – then prime minister Gough 
Whitlam returning the land to the Gurindji – but conceded it sometimes “had to 
be reminded” to listen more.

He too addressed the Don Dale scandal, and repeated his apology on behalf of 
the Labor party.

“When your children are in our care, we are the parent, and it’s clear we 
didn’t fulfil our duty of care.”

Gunner said the royal commission would drag up ministers, public servants and 
guards, “and everyone will be held accountable”, but in the meantime changes 
would be made, including moving youth justice out of the corrections portfolio.

Shaw said the guards who had stripped and hit juvenile detainees should be 
jailed, and urged the next government to “start working with the parents and 
the guardians today so we can work on preventative measures where we belong. We 
are the little people, you mob are the big people,” she said.

Adam Giles says ABC aired report on Don Dale juvenile detention to damage him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/adam-giles-says-abc-report-on-don-dale-juvenile-detention-aired-to-damage-him>
“It’s us that have got to be part of the conversation with government, so we 
can start taking care of ourselves and our communities.”

The joint council meeting was held at Kalkarindji on the eve of the Freedom 
festival, commemorating 50 years since the Wave Hill walk-off.

Earlier on Thursday, delegates heard information about fracking laws and 
regulations, which could change dramatically if Labor wins the NT election next 
week and enacts its proposed moratorium.

The previous day, delegates had released a joint statement supporting moves to 
explore constitutional recognition that would “deliver meaningful and enduring 
benefits for our peoples”.

“We are prepared to examine models for constitutional recognition that deliver 
such benefits,” it said.

“Any progress towards constitutional recognition must not endanger our rights 
to negotiate treaties to finally achieve self-determination.”

The delegates said the constitutional information forums must be held in the 
bush with Aboriginal people.
 