
The film, television and games industries are incredibly competitive. Finding 
a route in – and making sure you're in the right place at the right time – is a 
test of initiative and endurance. Much like a video game or the plot of many a 
cinematic trilogy, getting a foothold in these industries can test even the 
sternest mettle.

And yet, there is no shortage of people wanting to work in TV, film and 
gaming. Thousands of students on the country's many media courses will attest 
to the fact that a career in our industries is highly prized. In fact, 57% of 
the young people we surveyed in the recentBAFTA Career Pathways Survey 
<http://www.bafta.org/about/supporting-talent/career-pathways-summit,3514,BA.html>
 have at one time considered working in these sectors.

So why would we want to encourage more people to enter? The answer is that it 
isn't volume we're after. As an organisation which champions creative 
excellence, BAFTA wants people to be judged on talent and aptitude rather than 
who they know or how long they are able to work for free.

So, we decided to speak to young people to get a better picture of how they 
are guided in their careers. We looked at how 16 to 24 year-olds access careers 
information, how easy it is to understand the process by which one enters film, 
television and games, and what sources of information have proved most reliable 
or useful.

The results make interesting reading. Young people who are actively aspiring 
to a career in film, television or games appear to be particularly dissatisfied 
with formal careers advice; just 9% believe they received excellent careers 
advice, while over a third say it was extremely unhelpful or did not help them 
much at all to choose a career. For a quarter of this group, contact with 
people already working in their chosen industry was their most useful source of 
advice, compared to the general population, who found careers advisors at 
school, college or university most useful.

Worryingly, of those who are actively looking to go into these industries and 
received unsatisfying careers advice, one in six were actively discouraged from 
their chosen path. It compares to just one in ten respondents being discouraged 
from a career option overall. This suggests that careers advice for aspiring 
television, film or games professionals tends to be more discouraging than for 
other career paths.

The research reveals a perception among young people and those who advise 
them, that these industries are harder to break into if you are from particular 
backgrounds or don't have family connections. It also suggests that women are 
more likely to be discouraged from these careers than men. The young people 
surveyed told us that clear advice and information about the best routes in is 
hard to find. The task of understanding the breadth of skills and the different 
roles available is an even bigger challenge than it should be – particularly 
when you consider the availability of resources such asBAFTA Guru 
<http://guru.bafta.org/>, which provides an insight into the experiences of 
some of the most successful names in film, television and games.

As well as our survey of young people, we asked almost 200 BAFTA members about 
their views on the careers advice they had received, and their experiences of 
starting out. It showed that there is no single route into the industries. 
Indeed, half of our members started their professional lives in a different 
industry so it is little wonder that we present a confusing picture.

Our young respondents told us one of the things they wanted to understand was 
what skills they needed to enter the industry – and how they can demonstrate 
them. They wanted to know what the biggest aid to getting in to the industry 
is, according to our members.

Our report should not be read as an indictment of careers advisors, parents or 
teachers. As an industry we need to open up a dialogue with these groups to 
help them understand what skills we are looking for and how young people can 
demonstrate them. We should explode the elitism – both real and perceived – 
inherent in our industries.

So how did BAFTA members respond to the survey? We asked a selection of our 
current members about what advice they would give to someone who is starting 
out in the industry. Here are some of their answers:

• "J J Abrams said it best when he said if he wasn't making stupid money out 
of directing films, he'd still be directing films, he'd just have another job 
on the side. You have to do it because you genuinely love it, not because it'll 
make you rich or famous. I tend to tell that to people who want to get into 
acting for the wrong reasons but it applies throughout."

• "Focus on what you want to do and be specific about targeting the right 
people who could help you. Research your chosen field and make sure you know 
what's involved in the role. Be prepared to start at the bottom and work your 
way up. It's the best way to get a solid knowledge of your chosen field and it 
will serve you well."

• "If you want to work in television, watch it. If you want to work in film, 
watch them. If you want to work in games, play them. Familiarise yourself with 
the issues in your chosen field and have an informed opinion. Don't be afraid 
to express an opinion even if it doesn't seem to be popular. Always remember 
the people who helped you and extend the same help to others when you are in a 
position to do so yourself. When you start moving up, don't surround yourself 
with 'yes' people. Never forget that you are always learning."

• "Don't be fooled by a media course as an answer to getting a job. It's not 
what you study but the real talent you have that will attract employers."

• "Never stop learning and never give up. Continue to grow and challenge 
yourself; leave doubting your ability to others. Enjoy the journey and don't 
obsess over the destination."

• "Take every opportunity to meet people in the industry. Most are more than 
happy to help and give advice. Eventually one will give you a job."

• "Treat every job, however small, like it is the most important one of your 
career."

• "Be prepared to put in your own time to gain experience. Volunteer – don't 
wait to be asked. Industry professionals are usually very responsive to someone 
who shows commitment and a willingness to learn. However, no one is hanging 
around waiting to hand you opportunities on a silver platter. You've got to 
find them yourself."

• "Create your own opportunities: write a script, produce a trailer, direct a 
short film."

• "Do your research. Make sure it is the right sector of the industry you want 
to get into. Honesty, hard work and perseverance pay off. Even though sometimes 
it's tough, there is nothing quite like seeing your name on the big screen."

• "Don't be afraid to admit your level of skill and knowledge; I would rather 
hire someone enthusiastic and keen to learn, than someone who has lied about 
their skills, then finds themselves out of their depth."

Anne Morrison is chair of BAFTA <http://www.bafta.org/>'s Learning and Events 
Committee

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 