
Popbitch <http://popbitch.com/home/>, the showbiz gossip website, is to launch 
a paid-for online magazine that will feature contributions from The Power of 
Nightmares documentary-maker Adam Curtis.

The site, which is co-owned by Camilla Wright, will launch the paid-for app in 
May offering longer reads alongside Popbitch's trademark online celebrity 
gossip and weekly newsletter. Popbitch's app will be produced on either a 
monthly or twice monthly basis.

The new digital magazine will have creative input from Curtis 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/adamcurtis/>, whose other polemical BBC 
documentaries include The Mayfair Set and The Century of the Self.

His first contribution is an online video 
<http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1632536729/popbitch-the-next-generation>, 
Popbitch: the next generation, made in collaboration with Brass Eye and South 
Park writer Jane Bussman, promoting the app and accompanying Kickstarter 
funding drive that launched on Tuesday and is seeking to raise £25,000 in the 
next month for creative projects. In return contributors will get various 
rewards including party invitations and membership of a founders club.

Wright is hoping the Kickstarter move will attract investment for specific 
editorial projects on top of seed investment she has already secured for the 
new digital magazine.

She said she expected consumers to pay about £1 or £2 for an issue of the app 
but that the price is still being discussed by her and her team, which includes 
Private Eye journalist Adam Macqueen.

The promo promises a "bigger bolder publication", for people who "love popular 
culture but might not trust the industry and the bullshit that goes with it".

Curtis is also part of the advisory, editorial and planning committee for the 
new paid-for venture.

Decisions about the content and look of the new magazine are still being 
thrashed out but it will be more international, more investigative and more 
in-depth, but with the same irreverent editorial attitude that Popbitch has 
become know for, Wright said. It will also have video content, and suggestions 
from Kickstarter donors are also expected to shape the creative direction of 
the new title.

"The idea is that everyone is moving to free but we are keen to go the other 
way," said Wright.

"To have good journalism you have to pay for it, it's as simple as that. Good 
longform journalism and proper investigations cannot be made for free. There is 
less money in journalism and we want to use the skills of people who are well 
trained and experienced and need outlets – both world-famous names and so-far 
unknown talents."

Wright said that the site would not be positioned in opposition to celebrities 
and the showbusiness industry, but added that it would not be seeking to cosy 
up to celebrities.

"Celebrities have increasingly come to influence our lives – just look at this 
week's press regulation talks – but employ so many publicists and lawyers it's 
not always easy to give an objective view of what they're up to.

"We aim to do this as we don't need access to celebrities and I suspect a lot 
of our writers will be working anonymously for us," she said. "We want 
something that is both really serious and really silly as well."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 