
What got you started?

Getting thrown out of the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama for 
insubordination. I had nothing to do that summer, so I entered a BBC young 
playwrights' competition, and won.

What was your big breakthrough?

The first show I did at the Edinburgh Fringe, Normal: The Düsseldorf Ripper. 
It got me some attention, possibly because it was about a serial killer.

Who or what have you sacrificed for your art?

Nothing. Writing is cruel and exposing, but it helps you through the worst 
times. No matter how shitty life gets, there's a part of your brain saying: 
"This is good material."

What's the worst thing anyone's ever said about you? 

A reviewer said of my film The Debt Collector that I hadn't spent 10 minutes 
thinking about it. Considering it took me two years to write and make, it was 
insulting enough for me to want to put him through a window.

Is all art political? 

Yes. An artist's job is, in part, to explore and define moralities. And 
politics and morality are intertwined.

Do you suffer for your art?

Yes, terribly - physically, mentally, posturally. Every time I write 
something, my smoking goes up by five cigarettes a day. It may kill me.

What advice would you give a young playwright?

All you need to do is tell a good story. 

What cultural tip would you give a tourist visiting Britain?

Bring a cushion. 

What's your favourite film? 

Last Tango in Paris had a huge impact on me professionally. It made me far 
braver about exploring sexuality in drama.

What's the greatest threat to theatre today?

The idea that it's an educative tool or a debating chamber. Theatre is 
entertainment, not a branch of philosophy.

In the movie of your life, who plays you?

I imagine myself as more handsome and dashing than I am. I'd like to say 
Daniel Craig, but I think it would be Philip Seymour Hoffman.

What's the best advice anyone ever gave you?

"Drugs are good for thinking, but not for doing." I'm not telling you who said 
that. Or whether I took it literally.

Is there anything about your career you regret? 

Not really. I could have worked with more celebrities, been better known and 
wealthier. But, rightly or wrongly, I've retained some integrity. You can't eat 
that - but it can keep you warm at night.

In short

Born: Edinburgh, 1967

Career: Plays include The Wonderful World of Dissocia and Edward Gant's 
Amazing Feats of Loneliness, at the Nuffield Theatre, Southampton (023-8067 
1771), until Saturday, then touring.

High point: "Eventually managing to take The Wonderful World of Dissocia to 
London. It had been turned down a lot."

Low point: "Writing an episode of [TV series] In Suspicious Circumstances. It 
was awful."
 