
The Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> executive 
chairman Peter Storrie has moved to offer public backing for his beleaguered 
manager, Tony Adams, after sanctioning the purchase of the veteran Greek 
midfielder Angelos Basinas on transfer deadline day to aid the club in their 
battle against relegation.

Adams has overseen only two victories in his 15 Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> games in charge since 
assuming the reins from Harry Redknapp in October. While the manager retains 
the support of the club's hierarchy, with his cause championed by the 
influential Storrie, that backing does come with the caveat that results 
improve on the pitch. There have been six defeats in their last seven league 
games and, while there were encouraging signs in the recent draw at Tottenham 
Hotspur, the defensive display at Fulham on Saturday was deemed unacceptable.

"There has been no board meeting to discuss the manager's position and there 
is not one planned," said Storrie. "Of course, both Tony Adams and I have 
spoken to owner Alexandre Gaydamak. We do this on a regular basis and, at the 
moment, our priority has been focused on adding to the squad. We are all 
concerned at our current run of poor results, none more so than Tony and 
myself. However, it is important we all pull together and get behind Tony and 
the team. We are all in this together. From the board through to the coaching 
staff and players – we win together and we lose together."

Basinas, a key member of his country's victorious squad at Euro 2004 and 
capped 97 times, has joined on an 18-month contract from the Greek clubAEK 
Athens <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aekathens> with the 33-year-old 
joining Theofanis Gekas, the striker on loan from Bayer Leverkusen, in 
bolstering Adams's squad. An attempt by Bolton Wanderers to secure the 
midfielder Sean Davis was rebuffed on Sunday, though Pompey's own attempt to 
sign Giovani dos Santos from Tottenham was abandoned with an extensive medical 
revealing that the player was lacking the match fitness to make an immediate 
impact at Fratton Park.

Dos Santos, a £4.7m signing from Barcelona last summer, has made only one 
appearance for Spurs since the end of October after requiring surgery on an 
ankle problem. A fee of around £3.5m had been agreed between the clubs, though 
Adams was wary over whether the Mexican teenager would be able to play a full 
part in the club's daunting next few fixtures, starting with the visit of 
Liverpool to the south coast on Saturday.

The manager's future will depend upon reviving the team's ailing form. Avram 
Grant, a former director of football at Portsmouth and a close friend of 
Gaydamak, has been mentioned as a potential replacement for Adams, though the 
Israeli has travelled to Italy in a bid to distance himself from the position. 
Adams has been working under difficult circumstances at Fratton Park, not least 
with the owner having made it clear he wants to sell the club with key players 
sold to ensure stability behind the scenes.

"The reality is that the owner has decided to sell the club," added Storrie. 
"Having invested more than £40m, the club has won the FA Cup and enjoyed two 
seasons with top 10 finishes and he has now decided not to continue that 
investment. As a result we had to sell two players to put the club on an even 
footing financially. We have done that by selling Lassana Diarra to Real Madrid 
and Jermain Defoe to Tottenham.

"But there has been no fire-sale. We have held on to the rest of the squad 
despite having enquiries for Peter Crouch, Glen Johnson and Sean Davis. These 
have all been rebuffed and we have also brought in five new players so far in 
January and turned Nadir Belhadj's loan into a permanent move. We all have our 
responsibilities. The board needs to make the right decisions off the field and 
the coaching staff need to get the tactics right and the players need to 
perform on the pitch."
 