


"The news is good" is a common greeting in Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>. But in the west of the 
country, despite President Alassane Ouattara's appeals for reconciliation, the 
news could be better. UN agencies and humanitarian organisations still have 
plenty to do in the region, scarred by massacres and reprisals following the 
presidential election last November.

In Toulepleu, in the Moyen-Cavally 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moyen-Cavally_Region> region close to Liberian 
border, the police chief Karim Abdul Diarra has a lot on his mind. "Two months 
ago Toulepleu was a ghost town, whereas normally it has a population of 
50,000," he explains. For a long time the town served as a base for forces 
loyal to ex-president Laurent Gbagbo, so everyone fled when the pro-Ouattara 
forces captured it in early March.

The hospital is a wreck, only a few schools have reopened and most of the 
population has not returned, but Diarra still believes things are improving. 
The president's Republican Forces of Ivory Coast (FRCI) are restoring law and 
order, but their presence worries the recently defeated.

"Everyone laughed and wept in turn," says Father Cyprien, the head of the 
Catholic mission in Duékoué. About 11,000 displaced persons are crammed into 
three hectares of land. A few weeks ago there were 30,000 people here, but they 
are beginning to return to their villages. "The biggest challenge is 
reconciliation," Cyprien explains to theUnicef 
<http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/cotedivoire.html> mission that has arrived 
to supervise programmes to restore public hygiene, medical care, sanitation and 
schooling.

It takes several hours for the Unicef vehicles to complete the 90km journey 
from Danané, cutting through forest. Locals refer to this route as "the axis of 
death", with a succession of mass killings and burnt-out homes.

The origin of the perpetrators varied with the ebb and flow of the frontline 
during the conflict. In one place hundreds of villagers were allegedly 
slaughtered by Liberian mercenaries, in Guérés it was Gbagbo supporters, in 
Malinkés pro-Ouattara forces and in some cases the FRCI were purportedly to 
blame.

Most people here are either fishers or farmers. Now their canoes and tools 
have been wrecked, their crops burned. After several months hiding in the bush, 
people have returned to find they no longer have a livelihood.

Here, as elsewhere, the rice and maize crops could not be harvested and the 
threat of famine is looming. According to Diarra, "the international 
organisations will need to stay here at least another year".

This article originally appeared in Le Monde <http://www.lemonde.fr/>
 