
Q Now that March 22nd has been announced as budget day, is there anything l 
should do before the day. Are there likely to be any nasty surprises?

UR

A It seems likely that the chancellor, Gordon Brown, will want to avoid any 
unpopular tax measures while he is cranking up his campaign to succeed Tony 
Blair as prime minister. Although many commentators are worried that Mr Brown 
has his figures wrong, and that the economic outlook is rather bleak, the 
immediate pressure to raise extra revenue has been eased by big inflows of 
corporation tax and measures to control overspending.

As a result it is likely that this year's budget will be a dull affair with 
the chancellor relying mainly on extra tax being raised by the Inland Revenue's 
aggressive attitude in chasing tax "dodgers" and closing the few remaining tax 
loopholes. And it is expected that the very generous tax relief given to 
venture capital trusts in the last budget will probably not be continued.

The main interest, in fact, is likely to be centred on the final pieces in the 
legislation for the "simplified", but radical, new pension regime coming into 
force from April 6. Even at this very late stage there are still a number of 
important details to be resolved. One is whether the chancellor will do another 
U-turn, as with residential property, and withdraw unquoted companies as a 
permitted investment in Sipps (Self Invested Pension Plans). Of wider 
significance could be further moves to restrict using the new pension 
arrangements as a means of reducing inheritance tax (IHT).

The chancellor is already committed to raising the IHT exemption to £275,000 
in the next tax year, and to £300,000 for 2007/8, so it is unlikely there will 
any further concessions in this area despite the fact that the rise in property 
prices in recent years means a lot more people will be liable to pay IHT bills 
in the future.

Many of the most popular ways to mitigate IHT by the use of trusts will be hit 
by the new rules on the taxation of trusts coming into effect on April 6. It is 
important, therefore, that the annual tax-free allowances are used to the full 
in every tax year. You can give away tax-free up to £3,000 each year, plus a 
further £3,000 if you have not used the previous year's allowance. You can also 
give away to as many people as you like a sum of £250 each annually.

Another tax-free allowance that cannot be carried forward is the capital gains 
tax exemption (currently £8,500). After a year of booming share markets it is 
particularly sensible to use this allowance, where possible, to reduce your tax 
liability. If you have not used your capital gains tax exemption on anything 
else, you can simply sell shares that have made good profits to crystallise the 
gains tax-free. In the past you could buy the shares back almost immediately at 
much the same price by "bed and breakfasting". That was selling the shares in 
the afternoon and buying them back the next morning, often with only a single 
dealing charge. Unfortunately the Inland Revenue banned that but you can still 
use what is known as "bed and spousing". Married couples can arrange for one 
spouse to sell shares whilst the other immediately buys them back. This retains 
the original joint portfolio and uses up one of the capital gains tax 
exemptions. The other spouse's exemption can be utilised by reversing the 
procedure leaving both spouses with reduced tax liabilities.

Another ploy is "Bed and Isa-ing". In this case you sell shares to use up your 
capital gains exemption and buy them back for inclusion in an Isa (Individual 
Savings Account) where they will be permanently exempt from capital gains tax.

It is a useful way of using up your annual Isa allowance, which like the 
capital gains exemption, cannot be carried over to the next financial year - if 
you don't use this allowance you lose it. Although share dividends in an Isa 
are now liable to tax, Isas remain an attractive investment. There is no 
capital gains tax liability at all and interest from cash and/or bonds is also 
tax-free. Not using your Isa allowance, if only to invest in a mini-cash Isa, 
is like looking a gift horse in the mouth.

Traditionally another "must" for end of tax year planning has been to ensure 
that you try and use as much as possible of your annual pension allowance - 
subject to age restrictions - setting the maximum level. From April 6 2006 all 
the age restrictions will be removed and so will the ability to "carry back" 
pension contributions to cover the previous year. There will be two main 
allowances. You will be able to pay pension contributions up to the equivalent 
of 100% of your earnings, with an initial maximum of £215,000 each tax year. 
There will also be a lifetime allowance of £1.5m . Those fortunate enough to 
have built up pension funds near or above the £1.5m lifetime limit will have to 
consider seeking "protection" from the penal taxation charged on any excess.

For the vast majority, however, the new pension regime will offer much greater 
flexibility. The Revenue has announced steps to restrict the reinvestment of 
the tax-free cash sum into funding another pension, with additional tax relief. 
Nevertheless there will be considerable scope for making the most of a whole 
new world of pension investment opportunities available from April 6. It is 
worth taking this into consideration when deciding what to do before the end of 
the current tax year.

.
 