
If you've been invited for a university interview, congratulations – the 
battle is, in part, won. The next challenge is to meet academics face-to-face 
and prove that you are able to cope with the demands of your chosen course.

Interviews are no mean feat, but if you do your preparation, you'll stand 
yourself in good stead, says Julian Skyrme, head of student recruitment at 
Manchester University. First, make sure you know exactly what to expect on the 
day.

"The university should send you information about what will happen when you 
arrive at interview – read this carefully," says Skyrme. "Check if you will be 
asked to sit an assessment, or if there is anything you need to take with you. 
If you're not sure, call and ask."

Also, speak to older students about how you can prepare, recommends Hira 
Nazir, a fourth-year dentistry student at Manchester University. "If you don't 
know anyone studying your course, you can contact students through websites 
like the Student Room or the university's Facebook page."

What you'll be asked varies according to degree choice, but it's all geared 
towards the same question – how suitable are you to study your subject at 
university level?

"It's essential that you read your personal statement through beforehand, as 
interviewers may wish to draw upon the topics you have raised," advises Dr 
Margaret Barnes-Davies, a graduate admissions tutor at the University of 
Leicester. "Think why you have chosen a particular subject and university – 
read about the course online, and pay attention to the teaching styles offered."

Candidates for particularly competitive subjects may also face academic 
questions. Nazir recalls being asked several specific dentistry questions. "I 
was asked about cross-contamination control – how would I reduce the risk of 
infection? And I was given a scenario – I had to imagine I was out in town on a 
Friday night. Of the people I would see there, I was asked to say who was 
mostly likely to end up in my surgery the next morning."

Tutors will be listening for analytical abilities and intellectual 
flexibility, says Skyrme. "They want to see that you've done wider reading 
beyond A-levels and that you are able to cope with new ideas.

"An English candidate might be asked what a feminist would think of a 
particular book, for example. There won't always be a right or wrong answer."

The key to preparing well is practice, which means plenty of mock interviews – 
with teachers, classmates or whoever is on hand. Valeed Ghafoor, a fourth-year 
medical student, remembers recruiting family members to act as interviewers.

"Even though they didn't know the subject well, they could still comment on my 
body language and the way I spoke. Although the academic element is very 
important, you also need to come across as someone who is intelligent, calm, 
and enjoys their subject."
 