
Of all the various challenges facing US attempts to fix Kandahar the biggest 
comes in the unlikely form of a former Chicago restaurateur.

Chubby, jovial and somewhat scruffy, Ahmed Wali Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai> swapped a blissfully 
straightforward life running an Afghan-themed restaurant in the US for the 
deadly turmoil of politics in his hometown.

These days, when he steps outside his front door on a sealed-off street in 
Kandahar, he gets straight into an armoured vehicle with bullet-proof glass and 
is followed by a cavalcade of white pick-up trucks carrying a small army of 
bodyguards.

There are plenty of people who might want to kill a man who is said to 
represent much that is hated about Kandahar's ruling class: entrenched 
corruption, the dominance of particular tribes and the ability of a small 
clique to control the province's war economy and politics.

In private, diplomats in Kabul compare him to the head of a mafia-style 
criminal syndicate. But very few people will criticise him publicly, 
particularly anyone who lives in Kandahar.

Some foreign policy analysts have broken the silence however, most notably 
Steve Coll, a former journalist and respected observer ofAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, who wrote last month that 
Ahmed Wali "is the most visible, most intractable symbol of the corruption and 
the corporate self-interest of the Karzai government in southern Afghanistan".

And, in a thorough study of the politics of Kandahar, Carl Forsberg, an 
analyst at the Institute for the Study of War, concluded that Karzai's 
behaviour "promote[s] instability and provides space for theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> to exist".

Fosberg warned that the foreign military effort "will not win the population 
over to the government unless it decouples the government of Kandahar from a 
small oligarchy that is perceived to rule by virtue of its guns and money".

On paper Karzai should just be a minor local politician. His only formal role 
is as the elected chairman of the provincial council, which in most other 
provinces is considered to be a position of negligible importance.

But what has made him the most powerful man in the south of Afghanistan is his 
relationship with his half brother, PresidentHamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, and with the international 
military and foreign intelligence services who have for years relied on him to 
get things done.

Analysts argue that through his brother, Karzai has de facto control over all 
local government appointments.

He is much more powerful, for example, than provincial governor Tooryalai 
Weesa who, as a recently returned Candian-Afghan citizen, cannot do anything 
without the say-so of Ahmed Wali Karzai.

And through the his intelligence links, Karzai is able to use private 
companies of his extended family to tap into the vast sums of money being spent 
every day by international military forces who have to go to Afghans for help 
with transport, security and construction.

Karzai says all such accusations are lies spread by his enemies, telling the 
Guardian: "I'm not dominating anything, I haven't got a single contract in the 
last nine years from anyone, I have no companies or nothing. You cannot find a 
single company that is related to me."

Forsberg argues that Karzai's commercial empire does not just anger ordinary 
Kandaharis. "Many of the local powerbrokers who are excluded from Wali Karzai's 
network see the Taliban insurgency as the only viable means of political 
opposition," he said.

Karzai claims jealousy from rivals plays a part in the criticism he faces. 
"They want to get rid of those companies that are doing well. They probably 
want to link me to someone in Somalia, you know, to discredit me," he said.

Until recently, it was accepted by Nato's top generals that there would be no 
point in launching a big offensive if Karzai remained in power.

At the start of the year Hamid Karzai was reportedly given a six-month 
ultimatum to get rid of his troublesome half brother.

And in March the Washington Post quoted an unnamed US military official who 
said he had personally threatened Ahmed Wali with entering his name on a Nato 
list of suspects who can be legally captured or killed.

But he now says he once again has a great relationship with the Americans: 
"There was the misunderstanding, we had between us and it's gone. I am having a 
good relation, a good working relation with them."
 