
When Ariane Sherine's brilliant initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/atheist-bus> for an "atheist bus" campaign 
was in its planning stages, I wrote to her to say that I was not happy about 
the word "probably" in the slogan "There is probably no God".

I would question the rationality of anyone who thought that there is probably 
no Father Christmas, or probably no fairies at the bottom of the garden, 
etcetera, and since such beliefs and beliefs in the gods of Olympus and Ararat 
and all other religions are on a par, there is no "probably" about it. To which 
Sherine replied that the advertisement would not be accepted by the bus 
companies unless it contained the word "probably".

According to Tim Bleakley, marketing director of CBS Outdoor 
<http://www.cbsoutdoor.co.uk>, which handles advertising for the bus networks, 
"advertising guidelines" require the word "probably"; to say that there is no 
God, he said, "would be misleading … So as not to fall foul of the code, you 
have to acknowledge that there is a grey area".

It would be misleading, eh? Thus the metaphysical authority of advertisers. 
You have to take your hat off to this one. If one wished to cite a better 
example of insidiousness, pusillanimity, timidity and absurdity, you would be 
hard pressed. There is something delicious about the thought of a functionary 
in an advertising agency doing ontology by arbitrating on the question of which 
fictional characters need a grey area of uncertainty around discussion of their 
existence – Little Red Riding Hood? Rumpelstiltskin? Santa? Betty Boop? Saint 
Veronica (who allegedly started out as sweat on a cloth and became a person)? 
Aphrodite? Wotan? Batman?

And of course the inevitable has immediately happened. Theos 
<http://www.theosthinktank.co.uk>, the religious "think" tank, clutching at 
straws, claims that the word "probably" might encourage some to take the slogan 
to mean the opposite of what it is intended to mean. Such is the way with 
theology.

But give a nanometer to the ever-hopeful faithful – hope being a virtue after 
all – and they will take ten thousand miles, bringing with them on the journey 
all the things for which religion is so notable, from fantasy through folly to 
febrility and fanaticism.

Well: let us for a moment take the advertising standards code seriously. 
Parity requires that in all the many advertisements promoting religious belief 
on the buses and underground trains, "allegedly" be inserted into claims and 
statements that imply the existence of supernatural agencies. Now that the 
gauntlet has been thrown down on "probably" for the atheist buses, let us 
demand that "allegedly" appear in all advertisements promoting the opposite 
view. I shall be writing to Tim Bleakley (CBS Outdoor, Camden Wharf, 28 
Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY) and theAdvertising Standards Authority 
<http://www.asa.org.uk/asa/how_to_complain/complaints_form> on the subject 
today, and invite you all to do likewise.
 