
The future of the chief of the probation watchdog has been put into question 
as a fresh conflict of interest row hit Whitehall.

Paul McDowell, the chief inspector of probation, is at the centre of a row 
following the disclosure that his wife is the deputy managing director of a 
private justice company that this week won the largest number of contracts to 
run probation services in England and Wales.

The disclosure came shortly after Fiona Woolf stepped down as the head of an 
inquiry into historical child sex abuse after a conflict of interest row.

McDowell was appointed by the justice secretary, Chris Grayling, to the 
crucial watchdog role last November. He is also a former chief executive of the 
crime reduction charity Nacro, which, in partnership with his wife Janine’s 
outsourcing company, Sodexo Justice Services, won six of the 21 regional 
probation contracts to supervise more than 200,000 offenders each year.

The Sodexo-Nacro partnership was named as preferred bidder to supervise tens 
of thousands of low- to medium-risk offenders in six parts of England, 
including in South Yorkshire, Essex, Northumbria, Cumbria and Lancashire, 
Norfolk and Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire as part of a 
£450m-a-year privatisation of 70% of the work of the probation service.

On Friday McDowell said he would not resign, saying that he had declared the 
conflict of interest when he applied for the £135,000-a-year job and that it 
could be “managed appropriately” by delegating inspections of the work of his 
wife’s company and his former charity.

“My wife and I do not discuss issues which it is inappropriate for us to 
discuss. We are very aware of what is appropriate and what is not,” he 
interrupted his holiday to tell the Guardian. “We have acted with absolute 
integrity and professionalism … I will not be got at by anybody.”

But Sir Alan Beith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-beith>, the 
chairman of the justice select committee, and the shadow justice secretary, 
Sadiq Khan, said the disclosure raised serious questions about McDowell’s 
independence.

Beith is particularly concerned that his committee was not told of Janine 
McDowell’s leading role in Sodexo when they endorsed her husband as Grayling’s 
preferred candidate at a special pre-appointment hearing for the job last 
autumn.

He said: “If the secretary of state was notified at the time of Mr McDowell’s 
appointment of the close family member, the justice committee should have been 
told. That interest has now become more significant now that Sodexo, as a 
preferred bidder, is likely to be directly involved in the provision of 
probation services with Nacro in six community rehabilitation company areas.”

Beith said that McDowell’s background had meant he was well suited to be a 
fully independent chief inspector. “The secretary of state and the committee 
will now need to consider the implications of the interest issue having become 
much more significant.”

The conflict of interest was not disclosed in either the evidence submitted in 
a letter by Grayling to the committee, nor in a lengthy CV or in oral evidence. 
McDowell told the Guardian he could not remember the issue being raised in the 
hearing and he didn’t think it had been. The committee confirmed on Friday that 
it had not been disclosed.

Khan said that so far McDowell had been “all but silent” on reports of chaos 
in the probation service caused by the government’s privatisation programme. 
“With this information coming to light, some will question whether this silence 
is because of his links with a company and a charity that has hoovered up big 
chunks of the privatised probation system.”

On Thursday the justice minister, Simon Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/simonhughes>, highlighted McDowell’s key 
role in monitoring Grayling’s shakeup. Hughes denied claims of daily chaos, 
telling the BBC Today programme: “The independent inspector of probation has 
alerted us to no concerns that the system isn’t moving across.”

When he appointed McDowell, Grayling said: “We are making radical changes to 
the rehabilitation of offenders, and we expect HMI Probation to play a vital 
role in maintaining high standards and shining a light across the new system, 
helping us to get the best from our crucial reforms.”

Khan said that during a critical period for the probation service it was 
crucial the chief inspector did his job without fear or favour and independent 
of government, political parties or big corporate interests.

A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “The chief inspector of probation did 
not have any involvement in the procurement of probation services. The terms of 
his appointment include a commercial confidentiality clause. This includes 
members of his family.”

Justice ministry sources said McDowell had always been upfront about the 
professional role of his wife. They also pointed to the legislation on 
potential or actual conflicts of interest involving chief inspectors which 
allows them to delegate all their duties, including signing off the report and 
leading on their media coverage.

Both the MoJ and McDowell believe the issue could be “worked out over the next 
week or so”.

An MoJ spokesperson said: “Preferred bidders have only just been announced and 
as with any contract the department will, of course, ensure that any potential 
conflicts are fully evaluated and appropriate arrangements put in place as 
necessary.”

McDowell said his role as a watchdog or in producing thematic reports would 
not be compromised by his withdrawal from inspecting the work done by 
Sodexo-Nacro. He said he would still be inspecting the work of the remaining 15 
community rehabilitation companies, 150 youth offending teams and the rump 
national probation service.

He insisted that inability to comment on the national probation situation or 
produce thematic reports would not be compromised as they did not involve 
assessing the work of an individual supplier.

He said while he was chief executive of Nacro before he became chief inspector 
in January he had withdrawn from all discussions about a possible partnership 
with Sodexo and the negotiations had all been conducted by his chairman.

The McDowells met while both were in the prison service. Paul was at one point 
governor of the public-sector Brixton prison, while Janine, was the director of 
the Sodexo-run Bronzefield women’s prison in west London.

Rob Allen, a prisons and probation expert, said: “I have no reason at all to 
question the integrity of either Paul or Janine, whom I have met, like and 
respect as professionals. But I do think there is a potential for a perceived 
if not actual conflict of interest. It needs addressing at the very least by 
greater transparency and in future by recruiting chief inspectors from outside 
the world of probation and community rehabilitation companies.”
 