
Sir Fred Goodwin's decision to hand back more than £200,000 of his 
controversial pension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/18/fred-goodwin-rbs-pension> 
comes just days after aSunday tabloid revealed he was living in a luxury villa 
just outside Cannes 
<http://www.newsoftheworld.co.uk/news/359670/We-find-former-RBS-chief-Sir-Fred-Goodwins-hideaway-in-France.html>
 in the south of France.

The man known as Fred the Shred for his savage cost-cutting, is the first 
banker to have become a priority target for the sort of paparazzi photographers 
who usually follow celebrities like Britney Spears and Angelina Jolie. One told 
the Guardian recently that the first pictures of Goodwin enjoying the high life 
could be worth £30,000 to a tabloid newspaper.

Last weekend snaps emerged of the £4m villa where Goodwin has been holed up, 
complete with pool and tennis court, on a private gated estate guarded by 
rottweilers.

The former RBS boss disappeared from public view shortly after being hauled 
before the Treasury select committee along with his chairman and their 
counterparts at the equally-stricken HBOS. All four men publicly apologised for 
their bank's downfall, and Goodwin said he "could not be more sorry". He 
admitted he had made a "bad mistake" buying Dutch bank ABN Amro at the top of 
the market, but Tory MP Michael Fallon told him: "You've destroyed a great 
British bank."

Goodwin is unlikely to have relished lying low on the Riviera. He had a 
reputation as an abrasive and aggressive manager, but is now regarded as 
unemployable for any senior executive position in the UK. His situation 
contrasts sharply with that of his counterpart at HBOS, Andy Hornby,who last 
week got himself another £1m-a-year job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/14/andy-hornby-alliance-boots-bos-crash>
, as chief executive of pharmacy and healthcare group Alliance Boots.

Hornby's rehabilitation is attributed to two factors – first, with a 
background in retailing he had another string to his bow, and second, Hornby 
had refused to take any payoff or pension from the bank.

Born in Paisley, Goodwin went to grammar school before studying law at Glasgow 
University. He then trained as an accountant and was a partner at Touche Ross 
by age 30. In 1990 he led the team that liquidated the collapsed Bank of Credit 
and Commerce International.

In 1995 he moved into banking, joining the Royal Bank in 1998 and becoming 
chief executive in 2000. There he led a series of acquisitions, including the 
purchase of a minority stake in Bank of China in 2005, which drew accusations 
of megalomania from critics, who suggested he was obsessed by global expansion.

He enjoyed rubbing shoulders with the rich and powerful – from Westminster to 
the high octane glamour of the Formula One circuit. During Gordon Brown's 
stewardship of the economy at the Treasury, Goodwin was a regular visitor to No 
11, one of the few City big-hitters to give the former chancellor advice.

His passions outside RBS were motor sports and golf, so it was little surprise 
that RBS became one of the top sponsors of each sport.

He was rewarded with many millions of pounds in salary, bonuses and shares and 
had all the necessary executive accoutrements.

Stephen Hester, who took over from Goodwin and is trying to salvage RBS, 
immediately cancelled a new $50m (£30m) executive jet Goodwin had put on order 
and last month sold off the $32m Dassault falcon executive jet bought by RBS to 
fly Goodwin and his senior colleagues around the world. That jet had been 
purchased in October 2002, when the bank was in the midst of cutting 18,000 
jobs as a result of RBS's takeover of NatWest.

Since the Treasury select committee, however, and harsh criticism about the 
scale of his pension – together with his determination not to hand it back – 
became clear, Goodwin has been villified.

There were calls for him to be stripped of his knighthood. Around 70 MPs 
signed a Commons motion calling for Goodwin to lose the right to call himself 
"Sir" and in AprilLabour MP Gordon Prentice wrote to the cabinet secretary, Sir 
Gus O'Donnell, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/23/mp-fred-goodwin-honour> who 
chairs the forfeiture committee, to ask him to take action. Prentice wrote: "I 
am told that cancellation is considered in cases where retention of the 
appointment or award would bring the honours system into disrepute.

"Sir Fred's role in the collapse of the Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, and his 
refusal to countenance any reduction in his grotesquely extravagant 
£700,000-a-year pension, convinces me it would be wholly inappropriate for him 
to retain the high honour of a knighthood."

In March, Goodwin's Edinburgh home was attacked by vandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/may/18/fred-goodwin-rbs-vandalism>, 
who left three windows shattered and smashed the rear window of his black 
Mercedes. Goodwin, who was not inside the house, was said to have been "shaken" 
by the incident.

An anonymous email was sent to media organisations shortly after the attack 
threatening further action against "criminal" bank bosses.

The email said: "We are angry that rich people, like him, are paying 
themselves a huge amount of money, and living in luxury, while ordinary people 
are made unemployed, destitute and homeless. This is a crime. Bank bosses 
should be jailed. This is just the beginning."

Eighteen police officers, including five detectives and forensic specialists, 
investigated the attack but failed to identify those behind it.

Sir Fred then went to ground, but last weekend he was flushed out of hiding by 
theNews of the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> – the 
paper his PR man Phil Hall used to edit.
 