
Actor, poet, painter, dancer: these are all real-life roles that Juliette 
Binoche <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliette-binoche> has performed with 
varying degrees of success or, at least, recognition. But this year it is as a 
human rights campaigner that the 46-year-old Oscar-winning star ofThe English 
Patient has drawn perhaps most headlines.

Just recently hers was one of the celebrity names attached to the 
international appeal to halt the stoning to death of Mohammadi Ashtiani, the 
43-year-old Iranian mother found guilty of adultery. Ashtiani had already been 
lashed 99 times and held in prison for five years, after confessing under 
torture to having affairs with two men.

Binoche was not the only actor to defend Ashtiani (Emma Thompson, Colin Firth 
and Robert De Niro also put their names to the campaign), but she was probably 
the one from whom the authorities inIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> least wanted to hear. As things stand, 
the woman who made her name in films includingThe Unbearable Lightness of Being,
Three Colours: Blueand Chocolat looks highly unlikely to be receiving any cards 
from the ayatollahs this Eid.

Beginning with the Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> in May, where she won the 
best actress award for her performance in Abbas Kiarostami'sCertified Copy, 
Binoche has exploited her global renown to bring attention to the arbitrary and 
often barbaric justice system of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

It started when she broke down crying during the press conference for 
Kiarostami's film. What prompted her tears was the news that Kiarostami's 
countryman, friend and fellow filmmaker, the Iranian director Jafar Panahi, who 
was meant to be a judge at Cannes, had commenced a hunger strike in Evin prison 
in Tehran.

The scene was all the more powerful because Binoche has long had a reputation, 
particularly in France, for being aloof and rather unemotional. The daughter of 
two Parisian actor-directors, Binoche started out working for auteurs like 
Jean-Luc Godard, and over her long career she has continually resisted the 
stereotypical romantic roles for which her exquisite features seemed to have 
been moulded.

Nor has she been any easier to pin down beyond the screen. While it's known 
that she has a 10-year-old daughter by the French actor Benoît Magimel and a 
son by a professional scuba diver, and that in the past she has had 
relationships with the actors Daniel Day-Lewis and Olivier Martinez, and the 
directors Leos Carax and Santiago Amigorena, Binoche is quite guarded about her 
private life, and often conceals her thoughts and experiences behind airy 
generalities.

Yet her demonstrative display at Cannes did what any number of well-meaning 
press releases might have failed to achieve: it grabbed the attention of the 
world's media. Binoche had met Panahi, a leading light of the Iranian new wave, 
in Iran. He was imprisoned, along with his wife, daughter and friends, 
apparently because he had been planning to make a film about the Green 
Revolution, the reformist movement opposed to the repressive theocratic junta 
that runs Iran.

It's thought that Binoche's close working relationship with Kiarostami, had 
led her to take a personal interest in his homeland. And the compliment appears 
to have returned by Iranians.

"Iran is very special," said Binoche during Cannes. "I've visited several 
times and we're closer than we think… We think of Iranian women as the property 
of men; chained up in the kitchen. But they know all about films and books and 
music. I was in a street in Tehran and all of a sudden I had five women in 
burqas chasing me, totally black from head to toe. And they knew all about me 
and had seen maybe five or six of my films."

She expressed her sympathies with Iranians, and specifically Panahi, when she 
went up to collect her best actress award at Cannes wearing a strapless white 
dress and a sign bearing the imprisoned director's name. Shortly afterwards, 
Panahi was released by the Iranian authorities, and many observers, 
particularly in France, attributed the decision in part to Binoche's actions.

Binoche was keen to play down the political significance of her intervention. 
"Doing a film with [Kiarostami] is already political, so I don't need to add 
more. Your consciousness should be in the choice of the work."

Instead, she preferred to highlight the humanitarian and, in particular, 
artistic merits of speaking out. "We need artists and intellectuals to have 
different views on our lives," she said. "I believe that artists should have 
this specific role, because they can influence the way we think."

On occasion, however, Binoche's "different views" have erred on that side of 
excessive difference sometimes referred to as plain bonkers. Three years ago, 
for example, while promoting a film entitledA Few Days in September, directed 
by her then boyfriend, the Argentinian Santiago Amigorena, she outlined her 
conviction that the CIA and the US government were involved in the 9/11 
attacks. By way of an endorsement for this view, she sought the opinion of an 
Iranian ambassador. "I went to see [the ambassador] at the time and he said of 
course it's true."

In other words, she not only helped foster the most pernicious and idiotic 
conspiracy theory of our time but appeared to be labouring under the belief 
that an ambassador for President Ahmadinejad's government – which actively 
promotes Holocaust denial – was, of all the world's diplomats, some kind of 
arbiter of truth.

Times and movies change, though, and so too, it appears, has Binoche's respect 
for the Iranian regime. Following the international publicity that Binoche 
helped to generate, and the widespread condemnation of Iran for its cruel and 
unusual punishment of women, the Iranian authorities changed Ashtiani's death 
sentence from stoning to hanging. In an effort to cover its tracks, the regime 
then terrorised Ashtiani's lawyer into exile and broadcast a murder confession 
by Ashtiani, almost certainly secured through torture.

Responding to this latest abuse of human rights by the Iranian government, 
Binoche recently put her name to a letter written by Bernard-Henri Levy, in 
which the French philosopher and activist accused the Iranians of "blatantly 
lying", called for Ashtiani's immediate release, and argued that her case was 
symbolic of the "freedom and dignity of thousands of others".

In a sense, it doesn't take much to sign a letter, but that should not 
necessarily detract from Binoche's small but symbolic protest. Along with her 
co-signatories, she has refused to accept the idea, common in some radical 
circles, that there are cultural exceptions to basic human rights. She has 
targeted the Iranian regime, while maintaining solidarity with the Iranian 
people. And she has shifted her focus from conspiratorial fantasy to real-life 
inhumanity.

Kate Allen, Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> UK director, believes 
Binoche's contribution has made an impact. Her stand on Iran this year, she 
says, "has definitely added to the international campaign to demand human 
rights in the country. There's no question that a well-timed intervention from 
the likes of Juliette Binoche can really give a boost to the work of human 
rights defenders around the world."

When La Binoche – as she is known in France – was young, her pretty sweetness 
earned her the nickname of La Brioche. And evidently it didn't just refer to 
her looks. "As a child," she once recalled, "I would dream about uniting people 
across the world. If you could do that through film, can you imagine how 
wonderful that would be?"

Uniting the world is a tall order, but this summer La Brioche has made it look 
a piece of cake. Not through her screen roles, as well acted as they may be, 
but her lead in supporting rights.

Certified Copy opens on 3 September
 