
In a parallel universe created by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling in the 
1990 steampunk novelThe Difference Engine, Ada Lovelace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> is depicted as a dreamy, 
untethered gambling addict past her mathematical prime. Other versions in 
popular imagination range from feminist icon and founder of computer 
programming, to a faithful scribe who only recorded and reflected on Charles 
Babbage’s genius. But the real Lovelace was highly intelligent and made a 
significant contribution to the philosophy of early computing, seeing potential 
far beyond Babbage’s pragmatism.

When I think of Lovelace, my visceral reaction is one of regret. In the 
parallel universe where girls as well as boys are equally encouraged and likely 
to become scientists, engineers and mathematicians, what could she have 
accomplished? And not just she, but all of her female contemporaries? And what 
has our civilisation lost as a result?

The field of play has improved significantly since the Victorian era, but we 
are still a long way off living in that parallel universe. In my discipline, 
the life sciences (arguably amongst the most female-friendly), women scientists 
worldwide who are equally represented at the PhD level soon haemorrhage out of 
the academic career structure. Fewer than 20% remain at the professorial level. 
It’s much worse in other disciplines. such as chemistry, physics, mathematics 
and engineering.

This lack of balance is not some quaint holdover from a bygone era, still 
working its way through the system: the starting ratios have been equal for a 
generation, but women remain at a clear disadvantage. The reasons are complex, 
and probably include confidence issues, bias and family-unfriendly realities – 
long hours, the need to be itinerant, persistent job insecurity, and the 
self-fulfilling negative feedback loop of a lack of role models at the top.

The Athena SWAN charter was established in 2005 by the Equality Challenge Unit 
<http://www.ecu.ac.uk>, a UK charity, to try to rectify the problem in 
academia. Since its humble beginnings, the recognition it offers has grown into 
a coveted award (Bronze, Silver or Gold) craved by all universities and their 
departments. (The more cynical might ascribe this eagerness to the award being 
linked to funding eligibility. For example, the National Institutes of Health 
Research now requires departments to have a minimum Silver award to apply for 
certain grants, and it’s rumoured that other major funding bodies may soon 
follow suit.)

To achieve an award, departments or institutions must thoroughly analyse their 
own gender composition, and reflect on why it is as it is. It’s not just about 
overall people in post – they are also interested in fine detail, such as the 
gender ratios of recruitment and promotion panels, and of seminar speakers, or 
in how many women who go on maternity leave actually come back and stay in post 
for any length of time. The department must also put into place convincing and 
concrete plans to achieve a more equal gender balance in future.


I will admit that I was initially an Athena SWAN sceptic. From the outside, 
it’s easy to view the entire thing as a tick-box exercise designed to spin a 
suboptimal situation into something earnestly shiny. How could navel-gazing 
ever accomplish what decades of different, well-meaning programmes had failed 
to do?


In the December of 2015, however, I was asked to lead the renewal of my own 
Division’s Athena SWAN Silver award. I accepted because I am interested in 
gender issues and was deeply curious to see for myself how this process worked. 
But I was also wary, because the bar for a Silver renewal is higher than an 
initial award: you have to present evidence that your previous plans have 
actually had an impact. I knew that a number of initiatives had been put into 
place since our first 2013 award, but it was not clear from a casual glance 
that much had changed in the overall numbers.


Fast-forward to today, where my team of about 20 colleagues is frantically 
finalising our application for the 30 November deadline.

Grants, cupcakes and the delicate balance of being a scientist mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/sep/22/grants-cupcakes-and-the-delicate-balance-of-being-a-scientist-mother>
I’d had no idea from the outside how data-intensive the process is. We are up 
to our elbows in evidence: in survey and focus group responses, in tables of 
numbers of male and female student and staff in various groups and subgroups, 
in calculations of national averages against which we can benchmark our own 
performance.

My desk now sports a dangerously tilting heap of charts and graphs, scribbled 
over with different coloured pens, and my computer is plastered with 
spreadsheets. I’m at the nerve centre, with people emailing me graphs day and 
night, pinging files to my cloud, ringing me up to agonise over odds ratios or 
that file from HR that seems to be missing post-graduate taught student numbers 
from 2014.

We’re analysing with ever more granularity to determine which previous actions 
seem to have made a difference, and which, if any, we might quietly put out to 
pasture for being ineffective, to be replaced with better ideas.


Although the evidence-based focus of SWAN was an eye-opener, I think I was 
most surprised at how, at its heart, the process turned out to be utterly 
sincere. I was perhaps expecting nods and winks, complex strategies for 
papering over cracks; instead, we are staring our situation squarely in the 
face and honestly trying to understand why it’s not better, and what we can do 
to fix it.

Maybe it’s because we’re a bunch of scientists and it’s satisfying to prod and 
probe until the experiment finally works. Or maybe it’s because nobody wants 
this frustrating and perplexing lack of equality to remain as it’s been for 
generations.


It’s too soon to know if Athena SWAN can bring real gender parity into the 
academic sciences. It’s going to take more than a few years for changes in 
practice and culture to translate into living, breathing women professors.

Why scientists should march with Pride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/jul/01/why-scientists-should-march-with-pride-lgbt>
Meanwhile, I know that some are unhappy with its focus – some are men worried 
about unfairness, and some are women who sense they might become victims of 
tokenism. But most of the changes proposed by departments – such as holding key 
meetings during core hours, or promoting flexible working – end up benefitting 
both sexes, especially those who are parents and caregivers, making the 
profession a little bit more friendly.

And this outcome, I hope, is something that everyone can agree is a good thing.

 