
Born: 18 May 2005 
Place of birth: Chilanje clinic, Lusaka 
Birth weight: 2.75kg 
Mother: Bertha Mumba, 26 
Father: Joseph Mumba, 26

Bertha Mumba has her hands full. Three children under five years old play in 
the garden, another is at school and baby Prosper is half asleep in her arms. 
"He is absolutely, definitely, the last," she says. "We thought we would have 
just three, but God had other ideas for us."

She is not complaining, but is clearly worried. Bertha gave up teaching to be 
ordained and to help her husband, the Rev Joseph Mumba, set up the 
International Church In The Rock, 12 years ago in one of Lusaka's worst slum 
districts. Now their fortunes are directly linked to those of the poor.

"We rely completely on donations from the congregation," says Joseph. "If 
Zambia develops and there's work for the poor, then baby Prosper will prosper, 
too."

"And if the country does badly over the next decade, then Prosper's life will 
be hard," adds his wife.

Right now, things are very tricky.

"The congregation of about 300 people give willingly and voluntarily", says 
Bertha, "but it is not a regular income and it's very, very little. Sometimes 
they give us a bit of food, or help with the school fees or the rent. But if it 
does not improve then we will be on the edge. We can barely manage now, and 
with another baby it will be harder."

The family rents a two-bedroom house in Chilanje, a 1970s township on the 
southern edge of the expanding city. It is neither suburb, nor city, but its 
unmetalled streets and high hedges give a sense of calm.

The house has one light bulb in each room, curtains held up with string, a 
sofa, a vegetable garden and a peach tree. There are no decorations inside, 
except for a map of the world and a picture of Joseph's ordination. Their only 
luxuries are a television by the bed and some beautiful lace work.

The obvious thing to do, says Joseph, himself the son of a preacher, would be 
to move the church to a richer neighbourhood, which would help the family 
income considerably.

"It is tempting, but I cannot yet. The time isn't right. The reason we went to 
Kalingalinga district is because we felt that some churches actually discourage 
the poor. They are too up high. They make the poor feel that they are not 
accepted, and out of place. My calling is to help the poor, so we have to stay."

But he admits he is worried about how to provide for and educate his children. 
"People think that angels do not eat; they forget that we are human. It is 
financially very difficult now. But this is a faith venture. The harder it is, 
the more we see the hand of God and the more we see miracles."

Zambia needs an economic and health miracle, too. One in six people is thought 
to have HIV/Aids, and life expectancy has dropped to 37 years. Last year Zambia 
paid $377m (£207m) to creditors from developed countries, 45% of government 
revenue. Only $105.7m was spent on reducing poverty. If Zambia is to meet its 
minimum health, education, water and other development goals by 2015, says 
ActionAid, it will need five times as much aid, plus complete debt cancellation.

There has been so little investment in the poor that a whole generation has 
grown up without education or decent health services, says Hodi, a local 
non-governmental group.

"Zambia used to be a rich, healthy country, just a few years ago," says 
Bertha. "But its assets, like copper, have been so exploited and its people are 
sick. The price we get for commodities like coffee or metals are so low now. 
The country seems to get almost nothing. People are optimistic, but there are 
not many signs that things are getting better."

The congregation, mostly women, continually tells Bertha how tough life is.

"People come with their problems. They have so many. The thing they mostly 
complain about is their husbands not working, and the layoffs. They complain 
about the cost of living, the lack of access to drugs, the price of 
prescriptions. I feel like I am a social worker. I teach them how to avoid 
catching Aids. We help, I think, just by talking.

"We are not too bothered about the lack of money, but things like education 
and health are everything and investment is desperately needed. I want Prosper 
to grow into a man who will be someone in society. Education and health are 
fundamental here. With them we can have scientists and doctors. A society 
without good health and schools is nothing."

Prosper's parents both received a good education in the east of the country 
and in the industrial heartland of the copper belt, but they will have to dig 
deep to buy their five children a good education in Lusaka.

"I was a teacher," Bertha adds, "and although they don't get paid well, my 
vision is to start another school, perhaps in this area. But that needs money, 
too."

She was brought up by her uncle in one of the biggest government-run copper 
mines. "The air was bad, there were lots of accidents and he would get sick. He 
never saw the beautiful Africa. I would so like Prosper to see that."

 Factfile

Zambia

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births):  108

Population on under $2 a day:  87.4%

Debt per capita:  $433

Life expectancy:  32.4

% children in education (F/M):  43/47
 