
Pensioners are at risk of being ripped off when new rules on cashing in 
pension pots are introduced next month, MPs have warned.


Changes to accessing retirement savings come into force on 6 April and the 
public needs better protection from the accompanying threat of scams, 
mis-selling and poor decision-making, said the work and pensions select 
committee. Pensionerscould withdraw £6bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/12/pension-shakeup-6bn-withdrawn-annuities>
 within the first four months of the new regime, which abolishes the 
requirement to convert a pension pot into an annuity – the product that 
provides an income for life – and leaves people free to do whatever they like 
with their retirement cash.

In a report published on Tuesday, the parliamentary committee also criticised 
the city regulator for declaring that it was impossible to “stop fools behaving 
like fools” when it comes to spending pensions nest eggs. They accused the 
Financial Conduct Authority of being too slow in the past to take action to 
tackle previous pension scandals, and said they were not convinced it was 
“sufficiently focused” on the job.

The chair of the committee, Dame Anne Begg, said: “Savers need to be properly 
protected from being ripped off in frauds or scams, or suffering financial loss 
from making the wrong decision about how to use their pension pots. The 
pensions industry has not always done enough in the past to help savers make 
the right decisions.”

She added that pension saversneeded a single “strong” regulator to act in 
their interests. Currently, the job is shared between the FCA and thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator.


Seizing on a comment made to the committee by Christopher Woolard, a director 
of the FCA, that“what we can never do... is stop fools behaving like fools,” 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/work-and-pensions-committee/progress-with-automatic-enrolment-and-pension-reforms/oral/16914.html>
 Begg said that this “does not inspire confidence in the FCA’s willingness to 
be proactive in protecting savers”.

If weaknesses and loopholes are identified, urgent action needs to be taken as 
early in the new parliament as possible

There is concern that scammers are planning a fraud bonanza as they use talk 
of “pension freedom” to con the unwary. From next month, more than 300,000 
individuals a year with defined contribution or money purchase pensions will be 
able to access them as they wish after the age of 55.

There are fears that the industry will not be able to cope with demand and 
that insufficient advice systems are in place. Concern has already been 
expressed that some people will decide to blow their retirement savings on a 
fast car or luxury holiday, and many commentators have warned about the risks 
of older people falling victim to scams.


The Pensions Advisory Service (TPAS) – an independent, government-backed 
organisation – has reported that calls to its helplines indicated scams had 
already increased since the changes were announced in last year’s budget. 
Insurer Standard Life also told a committee hearing last year that an “active 
fraternity” of criminals saw an opportunity in the reforms.

In the report, the MPs said that while they welcomed the concept of greater 
flexibility at retirement, “there are also significant risks for individuals 
from the new freedoms”. These included running out of cash and “exposure to 
fraudulent, mis-sold or detrimental financial products”.

Britain’s insurers spent years clearing up the mess caused by the bad pensions 
advice they gave to at least two million people during the late 1980s and early 
1990s. Workers including nurses and teachers were wrongly advised by 
commission-hungry sales staff to opt out of company pension schemes and take 
out less advantageous personal plans.


The MPs said they recognised the government had launched a service called 
Pension Wise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/12/pensions-firm-says-new-freedoms-will-lead-to-bad-decisions>
 that would provide guidance to people approaching retirement. The committee 
also noted thatthe FCA had announced new rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/26/pensions-pots-laws-protect-cashing-retirement>
 which meant pension providers would be required to question older people about 
their personal circumstances – including their health and lifestyle – and issue 
them with “risk warnings” before releasing their cash.



The MPs recommended that the new government that takes office after the May 
election – in conjunction with a new independent pension commission they were 
proposing – should assess whether the protections for savers put in place so 
far were adequate. “If weaknesses and loopholes are identified, urgent action 
needs to be taken as early in the new parliament as possible.”

Responding to the report, an FCA spokesman said: “The pension freedoms offer 
consumers real opportunities about the decisions they make with their pension 
pot, but we are absolutely committed to ensuring they are protected from the 
risks the committee rightly identifies whilst giving consumers the right 
information to make these important decisions with confidence.”

TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady said: “The committee is right to warn 
that savers are at risk of being ‘ripped off’ in a new pensions scandal after 
George Osborne rushed through radical reforms with little thought of the 
consequences... We cannot afford to let savers get stung by excessive charges.”



 