
Ashya King <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king>, the five-year-old 
now waiting for radiotherapy in Prague following brain tumour surgery, will 
suffer the same side-effects and have the same chances of recovery as if he had 
been treated in the UK, NHS experts believe.

While they did not want to discuss Ashya's individual case, a team of leading 
cancer specialists explained why the brain tumour Ashya has, medulloblastoma, 
is not on the list of cancers approved by the NHS specialist board for proton 
beam therapy. TheNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> will pay for 
children with certain specific cancers to have proton beam therapy abroad if it 
offers benefits over conventional radiotherapy. Nearly 100 went last year, but 
children with Ashya's cancer were not among them.

Proton beam therapy is a form of radiotherapy, but using beams of protons 
which can be targeted to hit the tumour, deliver their load of cell-killing 
radiation and then stop. In conventional radiotherapy, using photons or x-rays, 
the radiation carries on travelling beyond the tumour itself and can cause 
damage to healthy tissue.

That makes proton beam therapy really useful for attacking tumours that can be 
precisely delineated and targeted, to spare other parts of the brain. But in 
medulloblastoma, the leftover cancer cells can be almost anywhere.

"There are some tumours that require radiotherapy to the whole brain and whole 
spinal cord," said Dr Yen-Ching Chang, a specialist in paediatric radiotherapy 
and lead on proton beam therapy at University College London hospitals, which 
will have one of the UK's two machines from 2018. In medulloblastoma, she said, 
"we are unable to spare any part of the brain to a great extent and the 
reduction of long-term side-effects is [therefore] less".

Proton beam therapy does not cure any more children than conventional 
radiotherapy. Its advantage is that it can save them in some circumstances from 
some of the side-effects that result from healthy brain tissue being 
irradiated. Those side-effects are long-term and in brain tumours are mostly 
neuropsychological. The child may have educational difficulties as he or she 
grows up. Radiation can also, in years to come, cause secondary cancers to 
develop, so the less healthy tissue that is exposed to it, the better.

But above all, in the treatment of a child like Ashya, what matters is to kill 
leftover cancer cells and prevent the tumour returning. That has to be done 
promptly after surgery, said experts. The evidence shows that as the weeks tick 
by, the child's chances are reduced.

"Medulloblastoma is one of the highly curable malignancies, but that has come 
about through a series of research trials," said Roger Taylor of the Royal 
College of Radiologists and professor of clinical oncology at Swansea 
University. The right combination of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy has 
produced good cure rates – Ashya's doctors at Southampton have said he has a 
70-80% chance of recovery.

But the radiotherapy has to be done soon after surgery. "The research has 
demonstrated time and again that the timing of radiotherapy is critical – 
ideally within four weeks and no longer than six weeks of surgery," said Taylor.

Doctors at Southampton told the Guardian on Saturday that they were worried 
when Ashya disappeared that each passing week would reduce his chances of 
survival. Ashya is now in his sixth week after surgery and the Prague hospital 
has undertaken to expedite his treatment.

Southampton hospital and the NHS came under heavy fire when Ashya's parents 
disappeared with their son and were then arrested in Spain. They put their case 
for proton beam therapy in a YouTube video that won them widespread support. 
But, said Dr Adrian Crellin of NHS England, the NHS takes decisions on 
treatment on the basis of evidence.Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> doctors have to talk to parents 
who have heard that proton beam therapy is a better treatment and hope it may 
prove a magic bullet that will provide a happy ending to a terrible story. Most 
of them understand when doctors tell them it is not so.

"The majority of parents are fantastic in taking that knowledge," he said. 
"They say all I needed to know was that I had asked the question and been 
listened to and answered.

"Yes, this is difficult stuff on a national basis but we have to listen to the 
clinical experts. We know what works. We have to put our trust in our clinical 
colleagues."
 