
A fresh upsurge of dissident republican violence in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> was orchestrated by a new 
nucleus of ex-IRA members who have defected from the Provisionals. Veterans of 
the Provisional IRA's North Armagh brigade were behind the 24-hour wave of 
shootings, blast bomb attacks and riots that rocked the Craigavon area at the 
beginning of last week.

Senior security sources in Northern Ireland pointed this weekend to a small 
but dedicated number of ex-NorthArmagh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh> 
brigade republicans who they say now pose a major threat to the peace process.

"They include one ex-prisoner who served life for murder and another 
responsible for a series of assassinations around North Armagh," a police 
officer said. "This core cannot be dismissed as amateurs or newcomers to the 
dissident scene. They have experience and a track record behind them which 
makes them good recruiting sergeants for kids around them."

The violence in Craigavon means that in almost every corner of Northern 
Ireland there have been short outbursts of dissident terrorist activity over 
the last six months. In August, dissidents linked to a ContinuityIRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> unit in Co Fermanagh fired an improvised 
rocket at a mobile patrol.

Although no one was killed or injured the murder bid was significant because 
it was the first time the dissidents had used semtex to set off a 
rocket-propelled grenade. Until then it appeared that the dissident groups did 
not have access to the Czech-made plastic explosive, which the Provisional IRA 
was meant to have destroyed in the arms decommissioning process two years ago.

Its presence is an indication that some of that explosive was taken from PIRA 
hides and handed over to the dissidents.

Attacks have taken place in Derry, Tyrone, Fermanagh and now Armagh. 
Significantly, none of the republican groups opposed to the current power 
sharing government between Sinn Féin and the Democratic Unionists - the Real 
IRA, Continuity IRA or a new group known as Óglaigh na hÉireann - has mounted 
any major attacks in the Greater Belfast area.

Police patrols came under fire from a sniper, two blast bombs were thrown, 
police vehicles were attacked with petrol bombs and stones, and an SDLP 
assembly member was assaulted during 24 hours of disturbances in the Tullygally 
and Drumbeg areas of Armagh town.

By the end of last week some calm had been restored to the nationalist 
districts, although residents claimed there had been heavy-handed police raids 
on homes that had compounded the trouble. However, graffiti warn of more 
violence to come, with one message warning that anyone cooperating with police 
investigations into the disturbances would be shot.

Sinn Féin condemned the dissident violence and what it claimed was the overuse 
of force during police searches. The party's local assembly man, John O'Dowd, a 
rising star, pointed out that the majority of republican voters still backed 
their peace strategy. Those behind the trouble "have no support in the area", 
O'Dowd said. But on the Tullygally and Drumbeg estates, Sinn Féin faces a new 
political opposition led by some of its own local stalwarts.

Following last week's disturbances local Lurgan republican Colin "Collie" 
Duffy rushed to Craigavon to support residents who he claimed had been at the 
sharp end of police raids.

Duffy, 41, left Sinn Féin and joined a political organisation known as éirígí, 
which was founded by disaffected Sinn Féin members who opposed the party's 
decision to recognise and support the Police Service of Northern Ireland. He 
described the violence in Craigavon as a "symptom of the fact that people are 
not prepared to accept the British occupation of Ireland in the shape of the 
PSNI/RUC".

The 41-year-old republican has been joined in éirígí by a famous republican 
face from the North Armagh area, ex-Sinn Féin councillor Brendan McKenna who 
fought for the rerouting of the annual loyalist Drumcree march in Portadown.

Éirígí supporters are alleged to be engaged in a graffiti campaign throughout 
republican redoubts in Northern Ireland. One encapsulates the disillusionment 
of some ex-Sinn Féin and former IRA activists over support for the police. 
Sprayed in silver paint, it says: "PSNI - 17% Catholic. 100% Unionist."
 