
Alex McLeish paid tribute to his side's professionalism after Rangers ensured 
there will be Scottish participation in the group stages of this year's 
Champions League by seeing off a resoluteAnorthosis Famagusta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anorthosisfamagusta> side at Ibrox.

Goals on either side of half time from Thomas Buffel and Dado Prso were enough 
for McLeish's men, who progressed despite a less than convincing start to the 
game.

"We had a hurdle to overcome, and things could have been edgy for us," said the
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager. "We saw, for 
example, what happened to Liverpool against CSKA Sofia which just proves you 
can't write any teams off.

"We played some great stuff, and if we get a good draw in the next stage then 
there's no reason why we can't do very well in this competition. We have to aim 
for the next phase if at all possible, and make a real impression in the 
Champions League, but just now it is a relief to get past this game."

On the eve of this second leg tie, McLeish had spoken of the prestige to be 
gained both personally and for his club by a sustained Champions League run, 
but the Rangers players failed to begin the match in a manner which befitted 
their manager's comments

Anorthosis player manager Temuri Ketsbaia watched a ferocious 30-yard drive 
come back off Ronald Waterreus' left hand post after 13 minutes, and just 
seconds later Nikos Frousos should have done better from the edge of the 
penalty area after robbing Rangers captain Barry Ferguson of the ball.

Ketsbaia, the temperamental former Newcastle and Wolves man, was roundly booed 
every time he touched the ball after pre-match comments which cast doubt over 
the gulf in class between relatively free-spending Rangers and their Cypriot 
opponents.

The 37-year-old Georgian simply seemed to revel in the atmosphere, though, and 
was the star player of the game's opening exchanges as Anorthosis littered the 
goal with long-range efforts.

Buffel was pushing forward at every opportunity to assist the forward 
partnership of Nacho Novo and Dado Prso, but the home side were unable to 
create any early chances despite the Belgian's promptings.

Indeed, it took 28 minutes for Prso to fire the first shot in anger on 
Georgallides' goal, the Croatian angling his 18-yard drive only inches wide.

It was harsh luck on the visitors, then, when Buffel latched on to a cute 
flick from Novo to lob the goalkeeper and hand Rangers a crucial 3-1 aggregate 
lead, seven minutes before the interval.

The home side began the second period with renewed vigour, and Prso slotted 
home from 15 yards after 57 minutes, holding off the lame challenge of Georgios 
Xenidis for his fourth goal of an already impressive season.

The Cypriot champions, who had endured 120 minutes and a penalty shoot-out 
defeat to Omonia Nicosia at the weekend, had just pride as a substitute for 
their shattered bodies.

Captain Nikos Nikolaou, who tragically lost four members of his family in last 
week's Greek air disaster, tried desperately to rally his side but this was 
Rangers' night.
 