
Europe’s insurance sector has a tough time ahead, according to analysts at 
Barclays.

But despite turning more negative overall, they are more upbeat on the 
prospects forPrudential, up 34p at £16.46, and Aviva, steady at 523p. Barclays 
said:

We downgrade the European insurance sector to negative [from neutral] to 
reflect the significant and growing capital and earnings headwinds facing the 
sector, particularly parts of the life sector. These challenges are primarily a 
result of low interest rates, but the new Solvency 2 rules – which have been 
eased the past few years to ensure no major industry casualties – remain a 
near-term threat and potentially a mid-term drag. In addition, property and 
casualty underwriting returns (both primary and reinsurance) are stalling, and 
growth is elusive.

Despite this backdrop, the sector has outperformed the EuroSTOXX in each of 
the past 3 years (71% since January 2012). While PEs and price to book ratios 
are in line with historical discounts to the wider European equity markets, 
both the ‘E’ and the ‘B’ are inflated and we believe the sector is trading at 
all-time relative highs, despite fundamentals heading into all-time lows. We 
believe this strong sentiment shift was driven by the growing payout ratios and 
strong dividend growth.

But earnings and solvency headwinds should combine to stall or even shrink 
dividends, reducing this key support. We therefore steer clear of the 
unpredictable risks associated with interest rate guarantees, and maintain a 
preference for UK Life names (Pru andAviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> both overweight) and 
property and casualty markets where we see solid balance sheets and relative 
underwriting margin stability (Sampo and Zurich (both overweight).

On Prudential <https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> specifically, 
the Barclays analysts said:

We see Prudential continuing to grow earnings at 12% compound annual growth 
rate and cash remittance at 15% compound annual growth rate over the next 5 
years, buoyed by Asian growth and an increasingly cash generative US business. 
At 14 time s our 2015 earnings per share estimate, we see Prudential as 
offering strong, quality growth at a very reasonable price.

And on Aviva:

We believe the acquisition of Friends Life transforms Aviva’s balance sheet, 
which is crucial in the Solvency 2 transition year. We also think the 
acquisition of Friends transforms Aviva’s cash generation, and makes the stock 
into a very attractive dividend stock in a market searching for yield.
 