
Alastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, 
Danny Boyle, Sunderland FC manager Sam Allardyce and the archbishop of 
Canterbury are among more than 200 high profile figures who have signed an open 
letter that calls for equality between physical and mental health treatment 
before the government’s spending review.

The letter, also signed by Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>, Bob Geldof, Miranda Hart 
and Mary Beard, calls for the government to help reduce the suffering of those 
with mental ill health by increasing investment in services.

“We accept, and urge ministers to accept, that this will require additional 
investment in mental health services,” the letter states. “But we are strongly 
persuaded that sustained investment in mental health services will lead to 
significant returns for the exchequer, by reducing the burden on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> through the improved wellbeing of our 
citizens, by helping people to stay in, or get back into work, and by helping 
young people succeed in education.”

The letter highlights 10 major concerns over inadequate mental health care, 
including the lack of access to treatment, long waiting times, inadequate 
crisis care, use of police cells and the 20-year gap in life expectancy between 
those with mental health problems and the rest of the population.

The signatories note comments acknowledging the high cost of mental ill 
health, including to individuals and their families as well as to the economy 
as a whole. “Some estimates put this cost as high as £100bn a year, spent on 
visits to A&E, lost jobs, unemployment benefits, homelessness support, police 
time, burden on the criminal justice system and prison places,” they write. “So 
the moral and economic argument for a new approach is clear. And so is the 
human and moral argument.”

It took a matter of days for the signatories to sign up to the all-party 
campaign launched by the Liberal Democrats’ former mental health minister, 
Norman Lamb, Time to Change ambassador and former Labour government 
communications director, Campbell, and the former Conservative cabinet 
minister, Andrew Mitchell.

“I wanted to make sure I could find a way of maintaining pressure to achieve 
equality for people suffering from mental ill health,” Lamb said. “I feel very 
strongly about this issue, in part because of family experience. I feel driven 
to overcome this historic injustice. In essence, it’s basically discrimination 
at the heart of the NHS. If you have a mental health problem you don’t have the 
same right to access treatment on a timely basis as one with a physical health 
problem.

“I know from my time in the department that every Monday morning the leaders 
of the NHS and the secretary of states and ministers are poring over real time 
data from across the country on performance of hospitals, A&E standards, cancer 
targets, and 18-week referral for treatment targets. There is an acute focus, 
and of course the fear that opposition will attack you if you miss those 
targets. But until April this year mental health had no maximum waiting time at 
all. I forced through the first ever maximum waiting time standards for early 
intervention in psychosis and access to psychological therapies, but that’s the 
start.”

Lamb said he did not put the blame on any one individual government. “But now 
there is this growing recognition of mental ill health and the importance of 
addressing it,” he added. “This government could, if it chose to, deliver a 
very proud achievement by 2020. People like Alastair Campbell and others in 
sport and business have raised awareness in society by speaking openly about 
their own mental ill health, which is massively important in combatting stigma.”

The letter is the centrepiece of a wider campaign that calls for equality 
between mental and physical health. In addition to other political figures who 
have backed the call, among them the prime minister’s former advisor Steve 
Hilton, and nine former Tory and Labour health secretaries, the first 
signatories include senior figures from business and employment, faith leaders, 
culture and arts, sport, the military, civil society, education and medicine.


“Mental health is an issue whose time has come,” Campbell said. “That we have 
gathered in a matter of a few days so many voices calling for equality with 
physical health is the latest sign of that. The cultural depth and political 
breadth of people making that call cannot be ignored. In addition to making the 
human case for a new approach I think we can persuade the government of the 
economic case too. The spending review is the opportunity for the government to 
show that they understand this.’”

Mitchell said: “Mental health affects families, wider society and businesses. 
Improving access to mental health care will help save lives and reduce the 
impact of mental health problems on our NHS, our schools and our places of 
work.”
 