
New figures released by the National Readership Survey (NRS), combining both 
print and online audiences for the first time, caused ructions behind the 
scenes.

I understand that two rival publishers complained vociferously about the way 
in which the data was to be presented. The central area of complaint involved 
the NRS's initial decision to release only the figures showing the "monthly 
reach" of each national newspaper title.

At least one publisher pressed hard to have the daily total published as well. 
It argued that advertisers would want to know just how many individuals buy a 
paper or use the website on a daily basis.

Though this private battle about readership figures should be seen as 
something of a teething problem, it reflects the importance to publishers of 
this "currency" that influences media buyers about where to buy space.

It also illustrates the complexity involved in creating a coherent picture of 
the print and screen audience for individual papers, one that satisfies 
everyone in the industry, whether they are editors, circulation directors or 
advertisers.

Clearly, NRS took the complaint on board and thus provided figures for 
monthly, weekly and daily readerships. But I happen to think the monthly 
picture is the truest metric, not least because it involves the largest sample.

One other notable feature of the figures is the discrepancy between the ABCe 
data and the NRS data. The online numbers for the latter are far smaller.

The reason, of course, is that ABCe measures machines while NRS measures 
people. An individual might make six separate visits a day to the Telegraph 
site, for example. In the jargon of the business, the NRS therefore 
de-duplicates. You may enter a supermarket twice in a day, but you remain a 
single shopper.

Overall, looking at the figures in detail - as my colleague Josh Halliday has 
done 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/sep/12/guardian-9-million-readers-nrs> - 
there are few surprises. But it does confirm that paywalls significantly reduce 
online audiences.

The monthly online audience for The Times was 295,000, compared to 6.4m for 
The Guardian and 5.3m for theDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>. Using the daily comparison, 
the figures were, respectively, 24,000, 740,000 and 523,000.

Out on front was Mail Online with 6.8m visitors. By virtue of its print sale, 
The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> came out ahead on the combined 
figures, with its website recording a monthly reach of 3.28m, the fourth 
highest in the online users' list.
 