
After we were freed from prison, Masha Alekhina and I seriously discussed 
trying our hand as institutional politicians, and thought about running as 
regional candidates for the Moscow City Duma elections (which will be held on 
14 September). But, having committed a "grave crime", we are barred from 
standing for election for 10 years by Russian law.

Late last month, Nikolai Lyaskin and Konstantine Yankauskas announced the 
launch of their candidacies for the Moscow City Duma. They are some of the 
strongest opposition candidates, and I've known them for years. They know how 
to put up a good fight.

But two days later, their homes were searched and authorities promptly charged 
the two men with fraud in connection to opposition leader Alexei Navalny's 2013 
mayoral campaign. If convicted, the two may face up to 10 years in prison – 
but, until then, they can still be elected. Yankauskas, like Navalny, remains 
under house arrest and is denied communication with the outside world: he's not 
allowed any phone calls or even an internet connection. Lyaskin was released 
pending trial on the condition that he does not leaveRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

Why would Putin – who just conquered Crimea, who proclaimed himself the 
unifier of the former land of Russia under the USSR, and who maintains (
according to state opinion polls 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/2014/03/26/putins-approval-rating-hits-80-percent/>
) the support of more than 80% of Russian citizens – be unable to tolerate a 
little trivial competition (a pair of independent opposition politicians) in 
even a local election? The answer is simple, and Lyaskin and Yankauskas know 
it: Putin is afraid of them, just like Putin was afraid of Pussy Riot.


The Moscow elections mean more to us than just any regional elections: they 
are the last chance in the foreseeable future to legally affect the national 
political agenda. The next federal elections (to the national Duma) are not 
until 2016, and without some opposition voice in the government – or barring a 
miracle – we will be doomed to the political monopoly of Putin and his friends.

Now, with less than 100 days before the Moscow City elections, the campaigns 
of the most powerful candidates have been undercut by criminal prosecutions. 
Lyaskin, however, says that the situation "just makes more work for us (and to 
reduce our efforts now will just not work)".


Lyaskin, Yankauskas and the third person involved in the case, Vladimir 
Ashurkov (who is considered to be at large), face charges that they stole 
$300,000 in online donations from Navalny supporters online during his 2013 
mayoral election campaign. But neither Navalny nor the 16,000 people who 
donated to his campaign consider themselves victims.

Navalny, for his part, said, "[The authorities] decided to punish [Lyaskin, 
Yankauskas and Ashurkov] for what we all demonstrated together: that you can 
finance a large campaign, relying on the people, not the Kremlin oligarchs or 
black money." Investigating authorities are now questioning all of Navalny's 
donors –Are you aware of the political activity of Navalny? Did you participate 
in it, and if so, under what circumstances? – trying to find someone who 
considers himself a victim of this supposed scheme. But these people are not 
the victims.

There is something to Putin's fears. While Masha and I were sitting behind 
bars, these dissenters worked wonders. They flew a paraglider over the plush 
palaces of Russian officials – Putin's friends – outside the city, and uploaded 
the photos online. In a corrupt political system, their candidate Navalny 
nonetheless managed to take a third of the votes in the capital’s mayoral 
election in the autumn of 2013. The efforts of Lyaskin and Yankauskas are even 
supported by donations from top managers and owners of leading Russian 
companies – and Ashurkov went into politics having held high positions in 
Russia's largest financial and industrial group Alpha-Group. These are not 
easily-silenced critics or marginalized people.

Still, Russia's recent foreign policy aggressions create higher risks for 
opposition forces domestically, and the background of domestic repression feeds 
back into the militant isolationist propaganda of the Russian media. Putin has 
referred to the Russian opposition forces as a "fifth column" of traitors; he's 
put forth the concept of a "Russian World" populated by citizens that "have a 
special genetic code"; and Sergey Kurginyan, Putin's political scientist and TV 
host on the nation's main channel, already announced the start of "World War 
IV", with theUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> and the West 
on the one side, and Russia on the other.

But Putin's power is not as unconditional as he wants it to appear to us – or 
to you. On 6 May, the day before Putin's latest inauguration, over 100,000 
people took part in a demonstration while chanting "For Russia without Putin!" 
Today, 31 people who took part in that demonstration are currently subject to 
prosecution – and three new people have just been added to the case. Among the 
newly charged is a young woman named Pauline Strongina, who is accused of 
"participation in mass disorders" because of a video that shows her throwing a 
plastic bottle. Under Russian law, a "mass disorder" is defined as "violence, 
pogroms, arson, destruction of property, the use of weapons, and/or explosive 
devices". She faces three to eight years in prison – all for supposedly 
throwing a plastic bottle.

What do these charges have in common? Someone allegedly stole money from a 
person who does not claim to be a victim of theft. Someone is said to have 
thrown a plastic bottle and participated in a "mass disorder". Someone else is 
charged because they threw a lemon. Someone else, like us, sang a song. Those 
charged don't necessarily seem like they have that much in common, except that 
they all want the same thing: Putin out of office.

When the authorities have to crack down so hard for such small violations, it 
is hard to escape the conclusion that someone in our country is very much 
afraid. And the opposition knows that we are not the ones who have anything to 
fear from a protest.
 