
Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny> said on Monday he would no 
longer comply with the terms of his house arrest and had cut off his monitoring 
tag.

Navalny, who led mass protests against Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> three years ago, was handed 
a suspended sentence on 30 December after being found guilty of embezzling 
money in a trial that led to his brother being jailed on similar charges.

He was placed under house arrest almost a year ago during the investigation 
but said in a blog that he was perhaps the only person in Russian legal history 
to be kept under house arrest after being sentenced.

He said he should have been released after sentencing in late December but 
instead was being held pending the publication of the verdict on 15 January – a 
situation that even the police did not know how to deal with.

“It is stupid to brag, but I am the first person in the history of Russian 
courts to be sitting under house arrest after the verdict,” he said on his blog.

“I refuse to comply with the requirements of my illegal detention under house 
arrest. The bracelet with some effort has been cut off with kitchen scissors,” 
he wrote, alongside a picture of the bracelet, or tag, that monitors his 
movements. He said he had no plans to travel far.

When Navalny was handed his suspended sentence, his brother was jailed for 
three and a half years. They had faced charges of stealing 30m roubles, (around 
$500,000 or £330,000 at the current exchange rate) from two firms including an 
affiliate of French cosmetics company Yves Rocher between 2008 and 2012.

Opposition figures say jailing Navalny risked new protests so he was being 
punished through his brother instead. The Kremlin denies influencing court 
decisions.

After the sentencing, Navalny broke house arrest to join a rally of hundreds 
of his supporters outside the Kremlin but was swiftly detained and driven home 
by police.

Navalny led the mass demonstrations in the winter of 2011-12 that at times 
brought tens of thousands of people on to the streets of Moscow and several 
other big Russian cities to protest against corruption and alleged election 
fraud.
 