
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> his given 
his marathon annual press conference in Moscow. More than 1,300 journalists 
were accredited this year, with many waving signs, flags and banners in order 
to get the Russian president's attention to ask a question.

Over the course of four hours he was asked about everything from missile 
systems to regional bypass roads, and was presented with a furry toy yeti by 
one journalist. Putin touched on many major themes:

Mikhail Khodorkovsky
 Putin has said he plans to pardon Mikhail Khodorkovsky – pictured above – 
after more than a decade behind bars. Photograph: Dmitry Kostyukov/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Putin said he would soon pardon jailed oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/19/vladimir-putin-mikhail-khodorkovsky>
, who still has eight months left to serve of a more than 10-year jail sentence.

A lawyer for Khodorkovsky said however that the tycoon had not asked Putin for 
a pardon. Khodorkovsky was jailed on charges including theft and fraud but the 
president's opponents regard him as a political prisoner.

Edward Snowden and the NSA leaks
 Edward Snowden in Moscow in October. Putin insists that Russia's intelligence 
agencies have not worked with the NSA whistleblower. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
Putin insisted that Russian intelligence has never worked with Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> – the former NSA 
contractor given temporary asylum in the country – and half-joked that he was 
"jealous" that US authorities were able to carry out such invasive surveillance 
programmes.

"Operationally, we are not working with him and never have done, and are not 
asking him any questions about how his agency worked onRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>," said Putin.

"I won't hide it, this person is not without interest for me. I think that 
thanks to Snowden, a lot changed in the minds of millions of people, including 
in the minds of major political leaders."

He added: "For me it was always intriguing how he decided this, because he's 
quite a young guy. What does he have? He doesn't have anything. How does he 
plan to live? Where does he plan to live?"

The former KGB agent said people should remember that espionage was necessary 
for security reasons: "However much our American friends are criticised, I 
think their work was mainly directed at fighting terrorism. Of course, this has 
its negative aspects and on a political level the appetites of the special 
services need to be controlled. But overall, you have to understand that it is 
necessary."

Ukraine

Putin insisted that Russia's $15bn (£9bn) bailout of the economically 
struggling country was driven by a desire to help a partner in dire straits.

"If we really say it's a brotherly nation, then we should of course act like 
close relatives and help them in this difficult situation," said Putin.

He denied that Russia put any pressure on Ukraine not to sign the EU pact – a 
move that sparked massive street protests "It's not linked in any way to the
maidan [protests in Independence Square], or to the EU association, we just see 
thatUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> is in a difficult 
position and we need to help it."

Greenpeace 'Arctic 30' protest
 Twenty-six of the Arctic 30 pose in St Petersburg on 3 December. Putin 
described their protest at the Prirazlomnaya rig as unacceptable. Photograph: 
Dmitri Sharomov 
Putin was scathing about the Greenpeace Arctic 30, who had faced up to seven 
years in jail over their Arctic oil drilling protest but are set to be freed 
under an amnesty passed by the Russian parliament on Wednesday. He said it was 
good thatGreenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> would 
benefit from the amnesty "but we didn't do it for them".

Putin said he supported environmental organisations, but said the Greenpeace 
protest against the Prirazlomnaya rig was unacceptable: "It was either an 
attempt at getting PR, or an attempt at blackmail and extortion, or they were 
carrying out somebody's order to stop our work."

Pussy Riot
 Pussy Riot's Maria Alyokhina (left) and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova. Putin said 
their behaviour 'degrades the dignity of women'. Photograph: Maxim Shipenkov/EPA
Putin was asked if he thought the two-year jail sentence given to members of 
the punk group, who are also due to be released under the amnesty law, was too 
harsh, and whether as a father himself he felt sorry for the two jailed young 
mothers.

"I felt sorry not for that, but for their disgraceful behaviour, which I think 
degrades the dignity of women … They crossed all boundaries."

Iran
 Hassan Rouhani speaks at a conference in Tehran. Putin spoke out against the 
blacklisting of additional Iranian companies. Photograph: Mohammad Berno/AP 
Putin praised the US's role in forging an interim deal to ease concerns about 
Iran's nuclear programme but said he hoped the blacklisting of additional 
Iranian companies under existing sanctions would not undermine progress toward 
a comprehensive agreement.

"As for sanctions, I am certain that this is a counterproductive decision," 
Putin said. "I hope … movements in this direction will not be a barrier to all 
of us moving forward towards a solution to the Iranian nuclear problem."

Iskander missiles
 An Iskander ballistic missile launcher. Putin says Russia has yet to decide 
whether to station the missiles in Kaliningrad. Photograph: Alexander 
Nemenov/AFP/Getty 
Putin sought to reassure the west about Russia's military deployments, saying 
Moscow had not yet decided whether to station Iskander missiles in its western 
enclave of Kaliningrad.

Nato members voiced alarm at reports this week that Russia had already 
deployed Iskanders in the enclave, which borders alliance members Poland and 
Lithuania. The missiles have a range of about 250 miles and can carry nuclear 
warheads.

Putin reiterated Moscow's position that an anti-missile shield the United 
States in building inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
with help from Nato nations poses a threat to Russia, and that it must respond.

"One of the possible responses is to deploy Iskander complexes in Kaliningrad 
... but I want to draw your attention to the fact that we have not yet made 
this decision yet, let them calm down."
 