
As a child, I often thought that other children were a bit stupid. It wasn’t 
that I didn’t like them; I just didn’t understand them. More to the point, I 
didn’t see why I should make an effort to understand them. Why didn’t everyone 
see things the same way I did?


What are the best books to help my son make friends?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/sep/01/book-doctor-childrens-books-boys-friendships>
Most baffling was the ability everyone had to hide things. Why couldn’t people 
just say how they felt or what they needed? The world would be a lot easier to 
navigate. I quite often said how I felt – which wasn’t always appreciated – and 
if I wasn’t allowed to say it, the expression on my face did just as well.

I had good friends (mostly) and I enjoyed school (mostly) but people still 
remained a mystery. I felt most at home with other creative types: I went to 
dancing lessons, drama club, orchestra, and I gained huge enjoyment from being 
among like-minded people. But none of these things, however much I liked them, 
could live up to the satisfaction and sense of belonging I got from books.

I read a lot of books. I took them everywhere. I recall sitting and reading at 
a magnificent Roman site somewhere in Europe. My father, an archaeologist, was 
trying to tell us about life in this amazing historical place – and all I 
wanted to do was read my book. Climb a mountain? Sure, but only if I can read 
whenever I sit down. In fact, if you can strap a book to my head so that I can 
readwhile walking, I’ll go through life like that, thanks.

Top 10 female friendships in YA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/feb/18/top-10-female-friendships-in-ya>
I gained a lot from reading. But I think I maybe missed out quite a bit by not 
making more of an effort to connect with other people. I wasn’t the friend 
other kids came to for help or advice. If asked, of course I would help. But if 
you were feeling a bit down, or something had happened at home and you were 
miserable – I probably wouldn’t notice. I didn’t sense atmosphere. I couldn’t 
easily tell how other people were feeling underneath. I wasn’t empathetic. And 
now I wonder how good a friend I was, without that very vital skill.

It’s taken me years to realise that feelings are just as valid as thoughts. 
And within my current circle of friends, I notice how damaging the opposite 
assumption can be. Children who grow up believing that their feelings are not 
important turn into adults who feel lonely without knowing why. Children who 
aren’t able to ask for help – or even to recognise that they need help – turn 
into adults trapped into behaviour patterns that make them unhappy. Children 
who aren’t allowed to express “negative” emotions like sadness, anger or fear 
turn into adults who feel overwhelmed with responsibilities and a sense of 
shame that they can’t cope. I was lucky to be born into a family where my 
feelings were heard and supported, and I felt I belonged. I may have felt like 
a square peg in a round hole in the wider world, but I was able to ask for help 
– and receive it. Many children aren’t.

Male friendship in teen books - yes, really
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/15/male-friendship-in-ya-teen-books-brian-conaghan>
In my latest book A Library of Lemons, 10-year-old Calypso has become used to 
the idea that she must “find her inner strength”. Since her mother died, her 
father has become emotionally and socially withdrawn, and Calypso finds herself 
responsible for the cleaning and laundry, as well as making sure her father 
eats regular meals. In the UK, it’s estimated that there are nearly 200,000 
children aged 5-17 who look after one or more parents in this way.


Calypso finds a friend – a kindred spirit of her own – in Mae, who shares her 
love of books but crucially has an emotionally secure home. This friendship has 
a miraculous effect on Calypso, providing her with a sense of well-being and 
security that she hadn’t even known she was missing.

Top 10 unlikely friendships in children’s books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/dec/10/top-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books>
Our society places a lot of value on achievements. But I am beginning to 
realise, at the age of 40, that the ability to reach out to other people, to 
hear them and value them, and in return to be able to share one’s own fears and 
insecurities, is more valuable than any level, qualification or prize. Good 
friendship can support, heal and rescue – and if I were in charge of education, 
I would want “friendship” to be on the curriculum. Perhaps then we would have 
fewer anxious and lonely children growing up into anxious and lonely adults.

A Library of Lemons by Jo Cotterill is out now, published by Piccadilly Press. 
Buy it at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/401646/>.
 