Which former Coronation Street star completes the name of this short-lived 
series: Emergency With …  Ken Morley (Reg Holdsworth)  Kevin Kennedy (Curly 
Watts)  Helen Worth (Gail Rodwell/Platt/Tilsley/Hillman/McIntyre)  Angela 
Griffin (Fiona Middleton) Which of these was a reality show starring Kate 
Thornton (left), Lee Sharpe (footballer), Kate Lawler (Big Brother winner), and 
Gianni from Eastenders (Gianni from Eastenders)?  Celebrity Wrestling  
Celebrity Farming  Celebrity Flirting  Celebrity Starving Which of these was a 
high-energy primetime vehicle for footballer Ian Wright?  Wright on the Money  
Know Your Wrights  Wright Here, Wright Now  Wright on Thyme (and other Pro 
Gardening Tips) In his latest show, Peter Andre routinely upsets unsuspecting 
members of the public. What's it called?  Peter Andre’s Friends Reunited  Peter 
Andre's Clothes Swap  Peter Andre's Colonic Tonic  Peter Andre's 60 Minute 
Makeover Amanda Holden is back on our screens – at last – with a team of celebs 
who do what?  Give a Man a Hat  Give a Dog a Name  Give a Pet a Home  Give a 
Pen a Lid Which of these upcoming BBC1 dramas appears to have nicked its title 
from a nursery rhyme protagonist?  Doctor Foster  Black Sheep  Jack Horner  
Peter Piper Which of these is a real ITV show?  Lad's Army  Citizen Smythe  Auf 
Wiedesehen My Pet  One Foot in the Rave Can you spot the genuine historical 
reboot from the fraud?  If Jesus Had Lived to A Hundred  Richard III – The 
Hunch is Back  Sherlock Holmes in the 22nd Century  Robin Hoodie Channel 4 
played on an Arnold Schwarzenegger film to create …  Kindergarten Chop  
Commando – In the Workplace  Scrotal Recall  The Germinator To the US, and MTV. 
Which of these was a knockabout name for a comedy-drama?  Hey! They're My Pants!
 I Just Want My Pants Back  Pantless in Seattle  No Pants, No Problems Steven 
Spielberg’s current small-screen production is determined to come across as 
enigmatic – what is it called?  Extant  Viscera  Once  Deja The Beeb again, 
with a truly Partridgean précis for a new detective series. "[NAME] is a 
brilliant police officer whose genius and fault-line is the fragility of his 
mind - a man haunted by the murder victims whose cases he must lay to rest. A 
man who must walk a professional tightrope between a pathology so extreme he 
risks permanent dismissal, and a healthy state of mind that would cure him of 
his gift." But what is the name of this new detective, who lends his surname to 
the title?  John Stamp  John Birch  John River  John Castle Which of these has 
NOT been a documentary by hard-man-with-a-heart Ross Kemp?  Ross Kemp: Extreme 
World  Ross Kemp: Middle East  Ross Kemp: Farc  Ross Kemp: In Search of Pirates 
Complete the name of this popular factutainment show. Extreme Fishing With …  
Jerome Flynn  Robson Green  Nigel Pivaro  Vinnie Jones and Paul Gascoigne And 
to show that perhaps this isn’t a post-Partridge phenomenon after all, we go 
back to 1990 – can you spot the genuine Nazi sitcom that appeared on British 
screens and was cancelled after one episode?  Walking up the Heil  Heil Honey, 
I’m Home  Himmler and Her  Heil Take It From Here, Son  You got…  
Congratulations! Full marks! You must start a TV production company, immediately
 Good work! You must start a TV production company, immediately  Good work! You 
must start a TV production company, immediately  Good work! You must start a TV 
production company, immediately  Good. You were mostly Wright on the money  
Good. You were mostly Wright on the money  Good. You were mostly Wright on the 
money  Not bad. You might yet become the subject of a Ross Kemp doc  Not bad. 
You might yet become the subject of a Ross Kemp doc  Oh dear. A cameo in I Just 
Want My Pants Back for you  Oh dear. A cameo in I Just Want My Pants Back for 
you  Oh dear. A cameo in I Just Want My Pants Back for you  Oh dear. We're 
telling Peter Andre on you  Oh dear. We're telling Peter Andre on you  Oh dear. 
We're telling Peter Andre on you  Oh dear. We're telling Peter Andre on you  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  