“Admittedly, I left the studio a little shaken and with a hurt hand – but my 
spirits were up. As I’d walked on set that day I had no inkling whatsoever as 
to what a seminal moment this was. It would be my last show on BBC television.” 
 Jeremy Clarkson  Alan Partridge “When I left the house the other morning to 
find that someone had sawn the rear spoiler off my Escort Cosworth during the 
night, I was speechless with rage.”  Alan Partridge  Jeremy Clarkson While 
filming in a church car park you plough your vehicle into a tree and drive off 
without telling anyone. But Pam, the church warden, finds out and complains 
that the “badly scarred” tree is now susceptible to woodworm. Despite your 
protestation that “it was public property and therefore I was entitled to drive 
into it”, the BBC pays the parish council £250 as a gesture of goodwill.  Alan 
Partridge  Jeremy Clarkson “Let’s not get hysterical. Some people assume it’s 
always wrong to smash a cripple in the face. But is it?”  Jeremy Clarkson  Alan 
Partridge “I was bullied at school, mercilessly and endlessly, for nearly two 
years. I forgot what it was like to wake up normally rather than as a result of 
someone letting a fire extinguisher off in my face ... I confided in my mother, 
who said that if everyone was picking on me then I must be doing something 
wrong.”  Alan Partridge  Jeremy Clarkson Raquel Welch agrees to appear on your 
show but then cancels. You spend 30 minutes hurling abuse at her down the 
phone, regularly addressing her by your ex-wife’s name. Her lawyers write to 
you three weeks later insisting you never contact her again.  Jeremy Clarkson  
Alan Partridge “I have been banned from driving Toyotas, I’ve had death 
threats, and my postman once had to deliver letters from what seemed like the 
entire population of Luton.”  Jeremy Clarkson  Alan Partridge Realising you are 
late for a wedding, you try to overtake on a country road but have to abandon 
the manoeuvre, cutting up the other driver. At the next lights, “a huge Irish 
person” gets out and spends a couple of minutes trying to throttle you. You 
escape with “mild bruising”.  Alan Partridge  Jeremy Clarkson “When I meet 
someone I know to be homosexual I can’t help staring at their bottom, 
wondering."  Jeremy Clarkson  Alan Partridge "Ever since I was thrown off a 
train by the police for arguing with a guard – who should have been drowned at 
birth – I’ve made it my business to avoid British Rail’s pitifully inadequate, 
overpriced, badly run, slow, sick-making service, but last weekend I had to go 
to Harwich."  Jeremy Clarkson  Alan Partridge You buy a lighthouse on the Isle 
of Man, but the locals complain that the high fence you've built around it 
makes it look like a German prisoner of war camp and also diverts a crucial 
ramblers' footpath. After a long legal battle, during which vandals uproot the 
fence, you lose in court and the path is reinstated.  Alan Partridge  Jeremy 
Clarkson  You got…  Top Gear! Knowing Jeremy, knowing Alan – aha!  Fairly 
impressive, but you should know the difference between these two TV titans by 
know  Woeful. Are you a cyclist?  Challenge your friends Submit answers  