 The Liberal Democrat conference agenda announced "Speech by the Rt Hon Alan 
Beith MP". Normally this would not provoke great excitment - a demonstration of 
quick drying paint might cause more adrenalin to spurt - and indeed the hall 
was less than full.
Mr Beith is a amiable and quietly spoken man, who happens to be deputy leader 
of the party. Now and again he stands for leader, but no-one takes this very 
seriously. He has a slightly puzzled air, like an accountant who has been 
mooned by a busload of schoolgirls. Geese occasionally say "boo" to him.

Before Peter Sutcliffe's arrest, Clement Freud, then a Liberal MP, used to 
insist that Mr Beith was the Yorkshire Ripper, a drollery which worked only 
because it would be hard to imagine anyone who looked or behaved less like a 
homicidal maniac.

I myself had a fantasy that mild mannered Alan Beith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-beith> would sometimes disappear 
into a phone booth and emerge as Super Pad, able to throttle his opponents with 
piano wire, but I have seen him in the same room as Sir Paddy too many times 
for that to be possible.

In a sometimes waspish profile in the Directory of Liberal Biography, Michael 
Meadowcroft hints at a more Machiavellian cast of mind than most of us have 
been able to perceive. In the past couple of years he has suffered two personal 
tragedies. Old political reference books show that, apart from wearing 
different spectacles, his appearance has scarcely changed in the 27 years he 
has been an MP.

As a speaker, Mr Beith might best be described as a rabble soother. So it was 
a pleasant surprise when he produced a rattling speech, full of pungent points, 
some genuine passion, and some good jokes. ("Did you come to the conference by 
train? I did - and I was three and a half hours late. They say Richard Branson 
isn't experienced at running a lottery; he already runs one, and it's called 
Virgin Trains.")

He said how outrageous it was that parliament was not even sitting during the 
fuel crisis. " Not even sitting because of of our archaic parliamentary 
calendar which closes the place down for three months of the year.

"Westminster could do nothing, and the public saw parliament as powerless and 
irrelevant." Sincerity is a hard thing to fake, even in a political speech, and 
Mr Beith was clearly and genuinely outraged.

He said that he found his constituents universally disiillusioned with the 
government. "They would like to stick the whole cabinet in the Big Brother 
house, so they could vote out one every week... though they might draw the line 
at seeing John Prescott in the shower."

But he was just as angry with the fuel protesters and "the anarchy in which a 
picket decides whether you get the fuel to take your wife to hospital, or for a 
nurse to visit your grandmother".

As for the Tories, he reserved a special and venemous contempt for them. Many 
people had felt excluded by 18 years of Tory rule. "William Hague's rhetoric 
suggests an even worse kind of exclusiveness. Now it's asylum seekers and Asian 
doctors singled out for opprobrium."

With a fierce warning that politics was in danger of becoming irrelevant to 
people's lives, he sat down.

The audience looked faintly numb. They had just been stirred by a Beith 
speech. They were as startled as they might have done if he had performed a 
striptease on the bar with Jackie Ballard. But after a few moments they 
realised their duty and, yes, a little late in the day, Alan Beith, of all 
people, won a standing ovation from the conference.
 