
What could be bigger than gravitational waves? Predicted by Einstein, 
confirmed to exist this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
, they are born of black holes colliding and the sound of space time itself 
warping through the Earth.

What couldn’t be bigger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/12/gravitational-waves-what-breakthroughs-can-we-expect-next>
, say scientists still pining for answers to the other mysteries of physics.

The discovery of dark matter, argued cosmologist Carlos Frenk at the annual 
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, would be 
more important than the detection of gravitational waves.

The latest results for the most sensitive dark matter detector in the world 
came in in December, and physicist Alex Murphy delivered them to the Guardian 
on Saturday. His team’s experiment is run nearly a mile down a former gold mine 
in South Dakota, with a vat of liquid xenon.

Gravitational waves: what breakthroughs can we expect next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/12/gravitational-waves-what-breakthroughs-can-we-expect-next>
But Murphy said his team could not upstage anyone yet – they have still not 
detected the mysterious material that is thought to make up a quarter of the 
universe.

The experiment was recently upgraded: cooling a vat containing a third of a 
ton of xenon to -150F, it means to detect the rare event of a xenon atom 
colliding with a dark matter particle, creating a tiny flash.


This has not yet happened, Murphy said. 

“But it’s certainly good news that more regions have been ruled out,” he said, 
referring to the various places scientists have been searching for dark matter. 
“There’s oodles and oodles of expected models,” he said. “It’s entirely 
conceivable that we find a signal very, very soon. But it’s also conceivable 
it’s going to take a long time.”

Physicists believe some kind of dark matter exists because astronomers can 
detect the gravitational pull it exerts on stars and galaxies. But dark matter 
itself is not only invisible, it has never been detected directly or indirectly 
by other means. Scientists have suggested that dark matter comprises “weakly 
interacting massive particles” (Wimps), leftover material from the big bang 
that pass through normal matter and leave no trace but in gravity.

“It’s a bigger quest than just trying to find it,” said Murphy, of the 
University of Edinburgh. “Once we see it that’s not the end of the road – it’s 
the key to unlocking what the deeper theory of physics is, and beyond the 
shadow of a doubt that’s going to be a long quest.”

The South Dakota scientists, whose lab is called the Large Underground Xenon 
(LUX), are not the only hunters at large. In Australia, a team is building the 
world’s latest dark matter detectorunder another gold mine 
<http://www.symmetrymagazine.org/article/october-2014/australias-first-dark-matter-experiment>
 (the caverns help shield the instruments from cosmic rays that could create a 
false alarm). In outer space, a detector is mountedon the International Space 
Station <http://www.ams02.org/> in the hopes that it can find an indirect sign 
of dark matter, like a rafter trying to make sense of ripples forming in water. 
Results are also expected from other vat experiments and particle colliders in 
the next year.

“It does make it quite competitive,” Murphy said, noting that LUX data had 
excluded what had seemed like tantalizing hints from other labs. “But if one of 
the competitors comes up with a very clear, distinctive signal for dark matter 
I think we’ll all be very happy.”

Over the next few years LUX will get another overhaul and about 10 tons of 
liquid xenon, essentially becoming a new detector named LUX_Zeplin, Murphy 
said, but the technical challenges mean results will likely have to wait until 
2018.

“You’ve got to keep control of 10 tons of liquid xenon a mile underground, 
knowing that you can’t afford to lose it because it’s very expensive, and that 
much cryogenic gas could be potentially be very dangerous. So you have a zero 
failure requirement.”

At AAAS researchers looking for another type of mysterious particle, a fourth 
type of neutrino, called “sterile” because it does not carry even the weak 
charges as does its neutral counterparts – the normal neutrinos. Kam-Biu Luk, a 
physicist at the University of California at Berkeley, announced new data 
showing an “unexpected disagreement between our observation and predictions” in 
the search for the particles.

He and his colleagues at an experiment in China, the Daya Bay Collaboration, 
found an extraordinary excess of antineutrinos there, in line with two other 
experiments. They published their results on Saturday in the journal Physical 
Review Letters.

Cosmologist Olga Mena Requejo suggested that should the new neutrinos be 
found, scientists could learn more about the relationship between matter and 
antimatter, and answer a question hovering over physics since the 1950s: “What 
is the neutrino character? Because it’s something unique, and it’s really, 
really important.”

And even for the scientists who do find what they’ve been seeking after 
decades of searching, life goes on. “In a certain way we’re still going through 
an existential crisis,” said Tim Andeen, one of the hundreds of scientists who 
helped find the Higgs boson particleexactly as they’d hoped to in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/dec/25/higgs-boson-discovery-extraordinarily-tense>
, at the Large Hadron Collider in Geneva.

“We had a thing to go and search for, and we got it,” he said. “Things 
would’ve gotten really weird if we hadn’t – we would’ve observed all kinds of 
things in the detector.”

Andeen, now at the University of Texas at Austin, said the work for new 
discoveries continue, though now researchers have a wider field to search for: 
signatures of supersymmetry, extra dimensions, dark matter. “We don’t have a 
Higgs boson to look for anymore, but we do know the Higgs boson can’t be the 
end of the story.”

Last year scientists at the collider found a tantalizing blip in the data, for 
instance, that Murphy said would be “incredibly hard to reconcile with the 
standard model”. But Andeen quickly cautioned that so far, at least, the signal 
is “statistically speaking not important”, and that it could easily go away as 
other bumps have before.

“We may or may not have something exciting to say in the next year.” 

 * This article was amended on 14 February to reflect that the LUX detector 
will be reconstructed, rather than simply upgraded.  