
The last time I baked a batch of tomatoes was last August, in the sun, on a 
flat rooftop in Gela in south-east Sicily. I had laid out several dozen tomato 
halves on a board, and balanced the board between two chairs next to the bright 
blue water tank, under the searing Sicilian sun. It clearly wasn’t the rooftop 
of tomatoes that my partner Vincenzo’s grandmother used to lay out – that 
everyone used to lay out – nor the scenario I had imagined, but then nothing in 
Sicily turned out to be as I imagined. One board was a start though. To begin 
with I checked attentively, watching the flesh sink and sides shrivel, and 
seeds become more and more obvious, like white buttons on a red double-breasted 
jacket. The next day, standing in the kitchen watching a summer storm batter 
against the window, I suddenly remembered. Shit. I ran up three flights of 
stairs to find most of my tomatoes floating in a rooftop puddle

I was remembering this as I cut tomatoes in half earlier this week. I am still 
not sure why I didn’t pick them out of the puddle and put them back on the 
board, because the rain stopped almost as suddenly as it had started. I didn’t 
even rescue those that could have been rescued. Perhaps because it all felt a 
bit feeble. This year we will be in Sicily earlier, July, which is when you 
should dry tomatoes; it’s less humid with less risk of rain. Still, I am going 
to try again. That means this column is going to be a Kitchen in Gela for a 
month or so. Which also means one reader’s request for sfincione, the fat 
Sicilian pizza, will be answered.

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for lamb chops with potatoes, green beans and pesto | A 
kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/31/lamb-chops-potatoes-beans-and-pesto-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>
Feelings about food are always relative. Having grown up in England in the 
1970s and 80s, I know all about “salad tomatoes”, about cliches of cardboard 
and cotton. But I also remember the best tomatoes in the world, the ones picked 
from the plants in the grow bag up against the sunny fence at the end of the 
garden. A close second were the huge beefy tomatoes my mum brought home from 
the Athenian grocer in Bayswater, which we ate skinned, thinly sliced and 
topped with my dad’s famous dressing. Looking back, those tomatoes were 
possibly Dutch. Vincenzo, on the other hand, grew up spending summers on his 
grandparents’ rented farmland near Gela, picking, eating and throwing tomatoes, 
hiding in the huge cauldron which later held litres and litres of tomato sauce, 
and chasing around the tables of wrinkled tomatoes on the roof. Coming from 
England to Rome, I appreciate, possibly idealise, the abundance of tomatoes 
that smell like tomatoes. On the other hand, coming up from Sicily to Rome 
means Vincenzo is less easily impressed. It is all relative.

As with simmering sauce until it reduces, roasting intensifies the flavour of 
tomatoes. For even more flavour, push a sliver of garlic and little piece of 
anchovy deep inside the tomato half. The garlic bakes into soft sweetness, and 
the anchovy disintegrates, its fishiness giving way to a rich savouriness. You 
can roast the tomatoes as they are, or add a layer of breadcrumbs, ideally the 
crumbs –la mollica – from the middle of a loaf that is a day or two old, 
neither too fresh, nor too dry. As always, the better the bread, the better the 
crumbs – a country style loaf or sourdough works well. As the tomatoes bake and 
soften along with the garlic and anchovy within, the bread becomes creamy 
underneath and crisp on top, a sort of deconstructed, inverted tomatoes on 
toast, another thing that drags me happily back to my childhood.

Exactly how long you cook your tray of tomatoes depends on both the tomatoes 
(and how much water they contain) and what you want to serve them with. If they 
are for beside fish, or roast chicken, then they need to be quite soft and 
fleshy, so they create something like a sauce. If you are serving them as part 
of an antipasti with olives, salami and cheese, or to be mixed with little gem 
lettuce – which is a most tasty and satisfying salad – you can cook them 
longer, until they are drier and the crumbs really crisp.

Baked tomatoes, anchovies, garlic and breadcrumbs

Hardly a recipe, but very good to eat, especially with baked or grilled fish, 
or roast chicken. Also as part of an antipasti.

Serves 4
700g tomatoes, ideally small plum sized-ones
A plump garlic clove
8 anchovy fillets
100g soft breadcrumbs from day old bread
Extra virgin olive oil
Salt

1 Set the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Rub a baking tray with olive oil, then 
half the tomatoes and sit them cut side up in the tin – they should be quite 
snug.

2 Peel and slice the garlic very thinly, and cut the anchovy fillets in four. 
Push a sliver of garlic, and piece of anchovy deep into the fleshy pulp of each 
half. Scatter the breadcrumbs over the tomatoes. Sprinkle with salt, and zigzag 
generously with olive oil.

3 Bake the tomatoes for 20–30 minutes or until the tomatoes are very soft and 
bubbling at the edges and the breadcrumbs are golden and crisp on top. You need 
to keep an eye on them.

• Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award
 