
There used to be a stall on the old Testaccio market that sold only tomatoes. 
It was run by a man called Carmelo, who wore his black hair slicked back and a 
gilet with many pockets. People called him by various names:Er Sor Carmelo the 
tomato man, or the tomato poet. My old neighbour Marcella, who was known for 
going to the market in her slippers, had a rather less flattering name for him, 
due to his prices and sleight of hand when choosing for you. Whatever you 
thought and called him though, one thing was sure: Carmelo knew his tomatoes 
and was as much a part of the market as the iron uprights, the marbled meat and 
the floral housecoats.

Carmelo’s stall was open year-long. In winter, it was subdued, but still full 
of promise, with dark red winter varieties, the seasonless Sicilian greenhouse 
standards and – best of all – bunches of small, almost pear-shaped Campania 
tomatoes. These came clad in such thick skins they could be hung throughout the 
winter, their flavour deepening with each new day.

In April, his stall was like an enthusiastic child, giddy with the first 
spring tomatoes. Then, as summer rolled in and on, the stall seemed overweight, 
the four sides splaying under the weight of so many boxes of red, ripe fruit. 
By September, the stall would almost smell boozy, Carmelo proud of his 
extraordinary selection; grape- and cherry-sized tomatoes that burst sweetly 
between your teeth; crates of slender San Marzano; dark red, deeply fluted 
tomatoes, which often seemed as if they had been blown up with a bicycle pump; 
others the size of plums, almost dry and sweetly acidic; great fleshy Cuore di 
Bue, looking like drawstring purses. Visiting his stall during summer’s last 
stand, I always felt torn: joy at the abundance and fleshy promise behind such 
thin skins, but also mild panic at his race against ripeness. What was to be 
done with it all? It must have been about this time of year – mid-September – 
when Carmelo told me aboutpomodori scoppiati: bursting tomatoes. Two words that 
immediately appealed.

It was also summer when the old market finally closed. We watched as the 
stallholders moved from their dark, bosky home of 40 years to a bright, white 
replacement on the other side of Testaccio. The old market hung on for a little 
longer, and I walked across it for as long as I could. Carmelo was the last man 
standing, a solitary, smoking figure surrounded by empty stalls. His tomatoes 
were certainly the last thing I bought from the old market; sweet and slightly 
fizzy, if I remember well, which I didn’t mind, knowing he wouldn’t or couldn’t 
move.

A ‘nuclear’ pickle recipe from Ukraine | A Kitchen in Ukraine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/06/quick-fermented-cucumbers-gherkins-olia-hercules-kitchen-in-ukraine>
The old structure was eventually padlocked, then knocked down to make way for 
a piazza my son and his classmates now treat like a backyard. I still see 
Carmelo around from time to time, usually on the bench in the piazza, less hair 
slicked back, the same gilet, a pouch of tobacco in one of its many pockets.

Carmelo’s aside, the other voice I have in my head as I make pomodori scoppiati
, is that of the food writerJulia Della Croce <http://www.juliadellacroce.com/>
, whose version of the dish is perfect. This isn’t really a recipe, more of an 
idea. You finish what summer has started: heat and salt help the tomatoes burst 
into a softness and release their liquor, which mixes with the olive oil to 
create a rich, silky sauce. This preparation is from Puglia wherepomodori 
scoppiati can also be served as a side dish. I like it with plain roast 
chicken, fat pork chops, or oven-baked fish. Best though, are bursting tomatoes 
stirred through pasta. Spaghetti is traditional, but – feel welcome to correct 
me – I prefer tagliatelle: the thick ribbons catch the sauce better and are the 
most satisfying shape to wind round your fork and eat. You need a pan with a 
lid, and the sweetest, reddest cherry tomatoes you can find. Don’t skimp on the 
olive oil and know that however carefully you lift the lid and squash, at least 
one tomato will split right at you and spray you with seeds.

Tagliatelle con pomodori scoppiati (tagliatelle with bursting tomatoes)

Serves 4
1–2 garlic cloves
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
1kg cherry tomatoes
A pinch of salt 
A pinch of oregano (optional)
A pinch of red chilli flakes (optional)
Fresh basil, ripped (optional) 
500g spaghetti, linguine or tagliatelle

1 Peel and gently crush the garlic with the back of a knife so the cloves 
break but remain intact. Put the garlic and olive oil in a cold pan, then heat 
gently so the garlic infuses the oil, sizzles, but doesn’t brown. You can 
remove the cloves now, if you like.

2 Add the tomatoes, salt, oregano and red chilli, if using, then stir until 
each tomato glistens. Cover and cook for 10 minutes, shaking the pan every now 
and then until all the tomatoes have split/burst. Lift the lid every few 
minutes and squash the tomatoes with the back of a wooden spoon to help release 
the juices: by the end you should have lots of thick, oily sauce. Stir in the 
basil, if using.

3 Meanwhile, bring a large pan of water to a fast boil, add salt, stir, then 
add the pasta, stir again and cook until al dente. Drain, reserving a little 
cooking water. Tip the pasta into the sauce, stir, adding a little cooking 
water if it feels at all stiff. Divide and serve.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award 


 