
Years ago we stopped off at Vincenzo’s parents’ house on our way home from the 
airport. It was late, and we were hungry. Waiting on the table was bread, a 
half-kilo ball ofmozzarella di bufala that had never seen the inside of a 
fridge, and a very large bowlful of green beans. The beans, cooked a couple of 
hours before, were as warm as the Roman summer night and at that ideal point: 
tender and sweetly nutty, bending but not floppy, and a few seconds beyond the 
squeak. Dressed with good olive oil and a bright spritz of lemon, they seemed a 
sort of green bean ideal. The two of us ate the entire bowlful.

At this time of year, huge heaps of slender green pods, with excellent curves, 
are centre stage on almost every stall on Testaccio market. They are often 
calledfagiolini al burro, which translates as “green beans with butter” – a 
clue to their nature, if you cook them to just the right point that is. They 
are mostly served as we ate them that night,fagiolini lessi – which sounds 
better than “boiled beans” – and served with olive oil and lemon on the side. 
Other Roman ways are green beans stewed oraffogati (drowned) in fresh tomatoes, 
then finished with lots of basil, dressed with mint, olive oil and vinegar, or 
– in our house – with new potatoes and pesto.

Potatoes and beans are brilliant partners for pesto, as demonstrated in Genova 
where they often add fine green beans and batons of potato to their beloved 
pasta and pesto. My pesto is pretty faithful to the Genovese version – so 
basil, pine nuts, garlic, olive oil and parmesan or pecorino. That said, I have 
no hesitation in making substitutions and blasting it up very quickly. You 
might need to add a little more olive oil to the pesto for it to behave like a 
dressing, which you should mix with potatoes, beans and ripped basil just 
before serving as the pesto turns from grass green to dowdy green quite 
quickly. Ideally, you want new potatoes with thin skins and waxy flesh cooked 
in plenty of well-salted boiling water.


Rachel Roddy’s baked pasta recipe | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/24/pasta-al-forno-baked-pasta-recipe-rachel-roddy>
To squeak or not to squeak: that is the question with beans. I say no squeak, 
but you may not agree. The way is to pick a bean from the well-salted rolling 
water and taste, which is also a way of preparing your fingers for the lamb.

I am not sure who has moved into that flat on the second floor, but they drink 
negronis on their tiny balcony below our balcony, and cook good things. Red 
peppers were roasted twice last week. This week, they were clearly cooking lamb 
on a very hot grill, the aroma of which met me at the main door, joined me in 
the caged lift shaft and taunted me all the way to our third floor front door. 
I shut the door on it, only to let it back in when I opened the kitchen balcony 
door.


I live with someone who doesn’t eat meat, and a child who isn’t bothered about 
it. But it also suits me only to eat meat occasionally: I am able to appreciate 
but ignore the daily taunts curling from Testaccio’s dozens of trattoria and 
now from my neighbours. This taunt worked, however, and the next day I went to 
visit my butcher, who thwacked four pale pinkcostolette di abbacchio (lamb 
cutlets) flat. He also offered me the lamb’s head, which sent me into a moral 
crisis, but only as far as theenoteca in the piazza, where I picked up a bottle 
of Campari, because not only is it is a time of year for grilling, it is also 
the time for glowing red drinks.

Scottaditto means “burn your fingers”, so abbacchio alla scottaditto reminds 
us chops or cutlets are best eaten immediately, with your fingers. In Rome, 
finger-burning lamb cutlets are always served with lemon, a spritz of which 
brightens the delicately flavoured meat and cuts through the golden fat. A 
spritz of lemon won’t go amiss on the potatoes, beans and pesto either. You 
could put lemon in your negroni too, but a curl of orange peel is better.

To squeak or not to squeak: that is the question with beans

Potatoes, green beans and pesto with lamb chops

If you don’t eat meat, potatoes, beans and pesto go well with hard-boiled 
eggs, grilled cheese or mozzarella. Leftovers can be made into a frittata, and 
leftover pesto used for pasta.

Serves 4
1kg new potatoes, all the same size
500g fine green beans
4 large, or 8 small lamb chops
Wedges of lemon

 For the pesto (makes more than you need)
50g basil
30g pine nuts or almonds
75ml olive oil (approx)
1–2 garlic cloves
50g grated parmesan/pecorino, or a mix of both

1 Scrub the potatoes, cover with cold, lightly salted water, bring to a gentle 
boil and then cook until tender to the point of a knife. Drain and then once 
they are cool enough to handle peel them if you wish. Snap the top and the tail 
from the beans. Bring a pan of water to the boil, add salt and stir. Add the 
beans and cook until tender; drain. Chop the potato into rough chunks and chop 
the beans in half if you like.

2 Make the pesto in a food processor, or in a deep bowl with an immersion 
blender by pulsing the basil (set a few leaves aside), pine nuts, olive oil and 
garlic together until you have a paste. Then stir in the cheese.

3 Put a couple of tablespoons of pesto in the bottom of a bowl, loosen it with 
a little more olive oil if it seems very thick. Add the potatoes, beans and the 
reserved basil leaves ripped into little pieces. Toss everything together.

4 Meanwhile, rub the lamb chops with olive oil and season with salt and 
pepper. Get your grillpan nice and hot and then cook the chops for about 3 
minutes on each side – the exact time will depend on the thickness of the chops.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award  