
You could say that the Sicilian vegetable cucuzze embodies the most 
uninspiring aspects of the squash family: their freakish proportions and 
overblown curves, their watery, spongy flesh that tastes of almost nothing. 
They are everywhere in mid-July; the definition of a glut. What’s more, they 
don’t fit. Like a teenager after a growth spurt, but before new clothes,cucuzze 
seem too big, they hang off market stalls like feet off the end of the bed, 
stick out of crates and topple out of even the biggest bag into the road. The 
wordcucuzza is used in various proverbs, standing for anything or anyone who is 
intrinsically insipid. Yet, despite this, perhaps because of some of it,cucuzze 
are beloved, and an absolute mainstay of the summer diet in Sicily.

Left to their own devices on the vine, the long, smooth pale-green cylinder of 
this particular Sicilian squash will curve. We have bought home one in the 
shape of the letter C, also a question mark that was competition worthy, and a 
long baseball bat, which Luca swung wildly. If the vines are trained, though,
cucuzze grow straight, reaching up to 180cm (6 ft) long.

We usually buy our cucuzze from Giuseppe, who farms the land almost exactly 
where Vincenzo’snonno (grandfather) farmed, which earns him serious family 
respect. His produce is superb. He trains hiscucuzze, so they don’t get too 
long or freaky. They still poke out of the crate in his garage-come-market 
stall run by his wife, Rosa. Also poking out are bunches oftenerumi, the 
stalks, velvety leaves, buds and tendrils of thecucuzza plant, huge, 
disobedient bunches that don’t need so much trimming as taming.

With cucuzze, their weakness is their strength: their spongy flesh. It reminds 
me of the memory foam you find in some mattresses. Their almost total absence 
of flavour is the ultimate in cooling food. Like lettuce, endive and cucumber, 
it refreshes the system. However, unlike salad, which is a crisp whip against 
summer lethargy,cucuzze dabs you on the head and tells you to go and lay down 
in a dark room. It also cleanses the system, apparently, which is 
wholeheartedly embraced and discussed at the dinner tables in Sicily.

Rachel Roddy’s Sicilian stuffed bread pie recipe is perfect for picnics | A 
kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/12/sicilian-impanata-recipe-picnic-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
In their cooking, cucuzze need allies, such as olive oil, chilli, garlic, salt 
and tomato extract, which they have a remarkable ability to absorb, and at the 
same time mute. Dicedcucuzze is used to make a favourite summer soup with 
sliced onion, a little diced potato, along with just enough tomato extract to 
make it blush. The soup is served just-warm or, in my family, cold. As odd as 
it may sound, it’s just the thing for tormentingly hot days.

Another way with cucuzze is to cook them slowly in their own juices with olive 
oil, garlic, chilli and salt, a half-fry, half-braise I think of as 
“smothering”, bringing out the best in the vegetable. This works just as well 
with courgettes or marrow; if they are oversized, with the sort of curves that 
would make a supermarket embarrassed, all the better. Smothering takes time, 
and you need to stay near the pan, first frying, then adding water, keeping an 
eye while thecucuzze braise. In time, the liquid evaporates, leaving tender 
chunks in a soft, oily sort-of-sauce that is just right for pasta.

Cucuzze or courgettes with pasta is such a mild dish, it needs a good finish. 
This would usually mean breadcrumbs, toasted in a little olive oil, something 
you often find bowls of on Sicilian tables. However, the other day we drove – 
as Vincenzo has done each summer since he was a boy – along the coast, to a 
town called Scoglitti, for a fish supper. One antipasti was a fish calledspatola
 with a breadcrumb and almond crust. At first, we didn’t get the almonds, just 
a lovely flavour, so we sat chewing with can’t-put-my-finger-on-it faces. 
Vincenzo was the first to get it, almonds, toasted so giving the breadcrumbs a 
rich, nutty texture with crunch, there was a hint of lemon too. I knew straight 
away the idea was a keeper, and just the boisterous thing for a mild mannered 
dish of pasta.

Pasta with courgettes, breadcrumbs and almonds

This recipe also works brilliantly with marrow.

Serves 4
4 courgettes or a long cucuzza
1-2 fat cloves of garlic
A pinch of red chilli flakes
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt
500g pasta
A handful of dry breadcrumbs
50g blanched almonds, roughly chopped

1 Trim the courgettes, cut them in quarters lengthways and chop into small, 
even pieces. (If you are usingcucuzza, you will need to peel them first). Peel 
the garlic, then either press it gently with the back of a knife or, for a 
stronger flavour, chop it.

2 In a large, deep pan, fry the garlic and chilli in 4 tbsp oil until the 
garlic is lightly golden and fragrant – you can now remove it if you like. Add 
the courgette (orcucuzza, or marrow) and add a pinch of salt, then stir so each 
piece is coated with oil and fry gently for a few more minutes. Add a small 
glass of water to the pan, then let the courgettes simmer until very soft and 
most of the water has gone. If they are ready before the pasta, pull the pan to 
one side.

3 Meanwhile, bring a large pan of water to the boil, add salt, stir. Add the 
pasta, then cook until al dente – around 8 minutes.

4 Heat 2 tbsp of olive oil in another small pan, add the breadcrumbs, almonds 
and a pinch of salt. Fry, shaking the pan, until just golden and toasty, then 
remove from the heat.

5 Once the pasta is ready, drain or use a slotted spoon to lift it directly 
from the water on to the courgettes. Stir, divide between bowls, then top with 
crumbs.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award  