
Another week, another courtyard. But then Testaccio, with its plainly handsome 
19th-century buildings mostly built in a figure of eight, has many courtyards. 
The courtyard of the flat I visited last week is smaller than most, more like a 
corridor, which is why the smell of beans met me long before the cook did. It 
led me, Bisto Kid style, up the right staircase to the right door.

I am not quite sure how to translate fagiolata? Maybe I should borrow the 
translation ofspaghettata, which is a feast of spaghetti for a group of people, 
change the spaghetti forfagioli (beans) making a fagiolata a feast of beans for 
a group of people. My friend Irene’s mum was standing stirring a huge pot of
pasta e fagioli, pasta and beans, when I arrived. On the table beside her, 
there was another pot of bean broth to lengthen the soup if more people than 
expected came. They did. Soon the room was full, a party for the local 
election, but before any talk of politics we all stood eating a soft, thick 
bean stew with thimble-like pasta, from plastic plates that drooped slightly.

On seeing a photo of the fagiolata a few days later, a Roman friend happily 
settled in London sent me a note full of longing for Rome, for the ultimate one 
pot stew that brings people together. I wonder how many situations would turn 
out differently if a plate of pasta and beans was eaten first?

Pasta e fagioli is a dish for all seasons. In winter, it is made with dried or 
tinned beans, a serious soffritto of onion, carrot and celery, tinned plum 
tomatoes, served steaming hot. From late spring, when fresh borlotti are 
showing off their raspberry ripple stripes at the market, the same dish wears 
summer clothes, freshly shelled beans, an olive oil and garlic sofritto, ripe 
tomatoes, fresh egg pasta and served at much the same temperature as a summer 
night.

Along with flaming courgette flowers, cherries and blushing stone fruit, 
borlotti beans are sure signs of summer. Unlike broad beans, which never open 
as easily as they promise, borlotti are ideal podding beans, their lovely pink 
and white mottled pod – reminiscent of the inside of a fancy book – falling 
open to reveal a line of equally lovely beans. Give me a beer and the radio and 
I might tell you podding borlotti is my favorite kitchen task; give me a 
podding partner and it definitely is.

It is hard not to feel disappointed by the way the mottle fades into 
bruise-brown as the beans cook. Their flavour makes up for the loss, somewhere 
between a chestnut and buttery chickpea. One of my favoutite ways with borlotti 
is aNigel Slater recipe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/nigelslaterrecipes>: warm 
beans mixed with olive oil, salt and rocket – which wilts obediently.

For this recipe, it is important the beans are cooked to the right point, 
which, for me, is teetering on the farside of tender (my partner Vincenzo would 
have a bit more bite).

As with pasta and chickpeas, there are infinite versions of pasta e fagioli. 
Today’s summer version is inspired by the dish at atavola calda called C’è 
Pasta e Pasta, where it is ladled with everyday ceremony from a fat, 
belly-shaped, terracotta pot that sits on the counter. It is rosy with fresh 
tomatoes, scented with rosemary, with just enough pureed beans to make it 
velvety and finished with badly cut pieces of fresh egg pasta.

Rachel Roddy’s roast tomatoes with breadcrumbs | A kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/07/roast-tomatoes-breadcrumbs>
To be too prescriptive about the recipe would be to miss the point of its 
generous nature. You can use whatever beans you like. The benefit though, of 
soaking your own beans or using freshly podded ones, is that many of the 
nutrients seep into the water as the beans cook, creating a starchy sauce of 
sorts, which is the ideal broth to put back into the soup.

How brothy or thick you like your pasta e fagioli is up to you, as is the 
amount of tomato. For herbs, many people like sage, but I think rosemary, all 
wild and sap green, flatters borlotti best, as does a little red chilli. The 
recipe is very straightforward, but you do need to keep an eye on the liquid 
levels, especially when you add the pasta. A swirl of olive oil, or some 
crumbed red chilli makes a nice finish.

Pasta e fagioli

Serves 4
400g fresh borlotti beans (this about a kilo of beans in their pods) or 170g 
dried borlotti, or 500g tinned
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
2 garlic cloves
A sprig of fresh rosemary
300-500g fresh tomatoes
Salt and black pepper
180g fresh egg pasta, cut into small, misshapen squares or 220g dried small 
pasta, or broken tagliatelle

1 If you are using dried beans, soak them for 12 hours or overnight. Drain, 
cover them with enough cold water that it comes at least 3 inches/10cm above 
the beans and cook at a simmer until tender, which usually takes about an hour 
and a half. Leave the beans to cool in their cooking liquid.
If you are using fresh beans, pod them, then cover them with enough cold water 
that it comes at least 10cm above the beans. Bring to a very gentle boil and 
then reduce to a simmer for 30 minutes or until the beans are tender. Leave the 
beans to cool in their cooking liquid. If you are using tinned beans, drain and 
rinse them.

2 Meanwhile, in a large, deep sauté pan or casserole, warm the olive oil over 
a low flame, add the peeled and gently crushed garlic cloves and rosemary, then 
fry them gently until fragrant. If desired, you can remove the garlic at this 
point. Peel the tomatoes, if you like, then roughly chop them and add them to 
the pan. Raise the heat just a little and cook the tomatoes for 10 minutes, or 
until soft and saucy. Add the beans and a couple generous ladlefuls of bean 
cooking water, then let the pan bubble away for another 10-15 minutes. Season 
with salt. At this point you may like to blend half the soup for a creamier 
consistency.

3 Add another couple of ladlefuls of bean cooking water and then the pasta. 
Continue cooking, stirring attentively until the pasta is tender. You may need 
to add a little more bean cooking water. Serve immediately.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award  