
For a short time, green beans made me anxious. I was 15 and had a weekend job 
as a silver service waitress at the Moat House in Harpenden, a handsome 
18th-century home transformed into a hotel by acres of thick carpet and fire 
doors. I did the odd breakfast shift, but mostly I was part of the group of 
local girls brought in to do functions and weddings – to serve bread rolls, 
roast meat, potatoes and two vegetables – to a large number of people, using 
two spoons.

For silver service, the position of your fingers curled between the two spoons 
is much the same as if you were going to play them – something my sister is 
pretty good at, only instead of thwacking them on your thigh, you use the 
spoons like tongs to serve food. Silver service is a skill – an art even – 
although not in my hands. The meat was always so well-cooked it was easy enough 
to clamp a single piece. Potatoes you simply lifted with one spoon. The batons 
of carrot and green beans however, required you to use the levering action 
adeptly to lift and then place the vegetables in a neat, evenly mixed pile.


It was my second or third wedding when my supervisor told me my vegetables 
were as messy as my hair – which would not be controlled by a hairband – and 
that neither were acceptable. Being told this made neither of the two any 
better – in fact quite the opposite. I can still remember my hands sweating as 
I tried to grab the damn vegetables, my hair a frizzy halo around my hot, red 
face.

I want messy piles of beans now though – especially before they disappear for 
the winter. It has been a summer of beans in Rome, but also in Dorset, where my 
mum planted her beans so closely they climbed up the bamboo poles into a dense, 
hardly penetrable, green teepee. The grandkids, already convinced the 
beanstalks were going to reach the sky, were just the right size to get right 
inside the green den. Dangling from the plant, green beans look like 1980s 
earrings, and picking them is rather like shaving or plucking, in that the more 
you do it, the faster they grow. Throughout August and September we picked 
pound after pound.


Rachel Roddy's two Italian pumpkin recipes | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/25/sweet-sour-pumpkin-recipe-roddy-zucca-all-capace-agrodolce>
When beans are good and plentiful, they need nothing more than boiling in 
salted water until tender and nutty, the ideal point being between a squeak and 
a flop, and then tossed in butter or olive oil, possibly topped with layer of 
cheese – parmesan or salted ricotta. Alternatively, green beans with 
pomegranate seeds, emerald and ruby, are as good to look at as they are to eat.

Beyond the messy plateful, my favourite recipe for green beans is from Fergus 
Henderson’s bookNose to Tail 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/complete-nose-to-tail.html>: Joan Chapman’s 
Great Bedwyn village fete prize-winning green-bean chutney. I make a batch 
every year. I also recommend the deconstructed piccalilli from the same book. 
Then there isMarcella Hazan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marcella-hazan>
’s green bean and potato bake, or pie.


I have also heard this dish called polpettone, and pastìccio – which comes 
from the latinpastīcium, originally signifying a filled pie, but has been 
adopted to describe various things: a piece of opera comprising work from many 
a composer; an unclear intellectual idea or theory; or simply a confused and 
messy situation.Che pastìccio. 


The ingredients, green beans, potatoes, eggs and cheese may seem messy for a 
while, but once baked in breadcrumbs they firm into something that can be 
sliced. The recipe, I know, reads unpromisingly, but the flavour is 
unexpectedly good, especially if you season boldly with cheese, salt and pepper.


Whatever you call it, this a homely dish, not at all fashionable, but tasty 
served as lunch with some sort of salad, vegetables or well-spiced chutney 
(Joan Chapman’s come to mind for a green-bean double), or as a starter, or even 
part of a buffet. The recipe is useful as a template; variations will pop into 
your head – other vegetables, a spoonful of ricotta, a handful of capers to 
razz things up ... Silver service is optional.

Green bean and potato bake

Serve with a watercress or orange and fennel salad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/01/orange-lentil-salad-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-sink-tales>
. You will need a 20cm cake or tart tin, ideally with a loose bottom, for this 
recipe.

Serves 4 –6
500g potatoes, ideally 2 or 3 the same size
450g green beans
100g parmesan cheese, grated
3 eggs, lightly beaten
Salt and black pepper
Nutmeg or oregano (optional)
Olive oil
Fine breadcrumbs

1 Set the oven to 180C350F/gas mark 4. Scrub, but don’t peel, the potatoes. 
Cover with cold water, bring to the boil then reduce to a simmer until tender. 
Drain and leave to cool. Cook the beans in fast-boiling, salted water until 
done, but still firm – they will continue cooking in the oven. Drain, then chop 
into small, rough pieces – I use scissors.

2 Once the potatoes are cooled enough to handle, peel them, then mash or pass 
them through a ricer. Mix the mash with the beans, cheese, eggs, salt, pepper 
and grating of nutmeg or pinch of oregano, if you are using it.

3 Oil the cake tin, then dust it with fine breadcrumbs. Scrape the mixture 
into the tin, level out the top, sprinkle with more breadcrumbs and zigzag with 
olive oil. Bake for 50 minutes to an hour, by which time the bake should be 
slightly puffed up and golden on top.

4 Let the bake cool for 20 minutes before running a blade around the edge and 
then turning it out on to a plate. Serve warm or at room temperature.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book awardF  