
When my grandma was in her early 80s, 10 years widowed and settled down south 
near us all, my dad took her on a trip back to Yorkshire. They drove around 
revisiting places from her life: the house she was born in; her schools; the 
church where she was married; and her last house in Stokesley. They visited 
relatives, where they took up offers of tea. (“Oh, yes please, that would be 
lovely, but only if it isn’t too much trouble.”) Then sat in front rooms, 
reminiscing. They drove through towns and past former workplaces, little of it 
unchanged. All the while they talked, some of which my dad captured on audio 
tape – a stream of memories, joyful and sad, plenty of hushed gossip and, true 
to form, a long observation about the most recent prawn sandwich eaten in a 
cafe. She loved a prawn sandwich. We don’t need a recording to remember 
Grandma, but I am so glad we have it.

There have been moments in the past 10 days when I wished I had recorded the 
stories I am hearing now. We are staying in Vincenzo’s family house in Gela, a 
town in south-east Sicily. Until last year, the house had been more or less 
boarded up for 20 years, ever since his grandparents moved north. It is a 
plain, three storey, concrete building in the warren of Gela’s backstreets, its 
grey facade mitigated by a pleasing balcony with coloured canvas woven through. 
With the help of family, we have been putting the house to rights – of sorts. 
Vincenzo’s father, Bartolomeo, is back in the town he married in 55 years ago.

Encyclopedic about Sicilian history, and fluent in local and family gossip, 
Bartolo walks with me around the town, revisiting relatives and colleagues, 
places of work, opticians, launderettes, noting who has aged well and who 
hasn’t. We walk down streets named after the family, while he explains the 
history of this very particular town. On occasions, he shouts about the place 
as if it was a corrupt person, but also marvels at the obstinate endurance of 
everything, the kindness and familiarity of people not seen for decades and the 
taste of soup made from tender greens, calledtenerumi. He dabs the sweat from 
his brow endlessly, and makes me laugh. Each night we take apasseggiata, 
passing the hundreds of men who gather in the piazza, to join the Gelese, 
unabashed lovers of conspicuous consumption and finery, on their nightly 
stroll. My sandals have never felt so flat, my hair so frizzy. After supper, as 
the cat from the collapsed house in front screeches in the street below and the 
fan rattles, I can hear Bartolo on the phone recounting the day’s events to his 
wife in Rome. Later, the arrival of the water will wake us all, a delirious 
motor pulling enough for two days up three floors to our new 1,500 litre tank 
on the roof.

A mouthwatering aubergine roll recipe from Sicily | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/05/rolled-grilled-stuffed-aubergine-recipe-involtini-di-melanzane-rachel-roddy>
One day, we were eating what is best described as a bread pie – two rounds of 
bread dough pinched around filling, when Bartolo said: “Posso dirti qualcosa, 
cara Rachel?” (May I say something, dear Rachel?) He told me I needed to put 
more filling in theimpanata. He was right – there wasn’t enough filling. Before 
marrying a girl from Gela, Bartolomeo lived in Riesi above his family’sforno 
(bakery) – a famous one by all accounts, where, as well as Sicilian sesame 
seed-encrusted bread, they madeimpanata stuffed with wilted greens, potatoes 
and anchovies. In Catania, we enjoy something similar calledscacciata, filled 
withtuma cheese and anchovies. Every town has its own version, I’m told. Mine 
borrows from bothimpanata and scacciata. The dough is made of coarse semolina 
flour, yeast, olive oil and water. The possibilities for fillings are endless. 
My son, predictably, demanded prosciutto and cheese, which I put in half. In 
the other half, I put anchovies and cheese, a soft and deeply savoury filling 
that stretches like a telephone cord when hot.

Remember to grease the tin and dough well, and to fill right to the edges. 
Practice is not advice we welcome in this age of fast, infallible recipes, but 
this is the sort of dish you need to make few times to get a feel for it; 
especially the fill and pinch. It is best straight out of the oven, but also 
just the thing for a picnic, the mention of which has Bartolomeo reminiscing 
about his mother making trays of pizza for thescampagnata, “the picnic 
scamper”, into the countryside. This leads into story about a local widow who 
was murdered by her son! My grandma would have gasped, but loved that story.

Impanata

Serves 4-6
10g dried yeast or 20g fresh yeast
1 tbsp sugar
500g flour, ideally semolina flour, but plain flour or 00-grade works too
10g salt
30ml extra virgin olive oil
Water

For the filling
500g mozzarella (well drained), tuma cheese or primosale, sliced
8-16 anchovy fillets or 8 slices of ham
Olive oil mixed with water or 1 beaten egg
Salt and black pepper

1 Dissolve the yeast and sugar in a glass of tepid water. Mix the flour, salt 
and olive oil in a large bowl, then add the dissolved yeast and enough extra 
water to bring everything together into a soft dough (usually another 200ml). 
Knead until smooth. Transfer to a lightly oiled bowl, cover with a cloth or 
clingfilm, then leave in a warm spot for 2 hours, or until doubled in size.

2 Lightly oil a 29cm-round tin. Halve the dough. Roll out both pieces on a 
lightly floured surface – one should be larger than the tin, the other the size 
of the tin. Press the big piece into it, making sure it comes up the sides. Rub 
the dough with oil. Arrange the cheese and anchovies, if using, evenly on the 
dough, sprinkle with a little salt and pepper. Brush the edges with oil, then 
cover with the remaining dough. Pinch and twist the edges closed. Brush with 
either oil mixed with water or beaten egg. Poke a few holes in the top with a 
fork and bake in a preheated oven at 200C/400F/gas mark 6 for 25-35 minutes, or 
until golden and puffed up.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290678/s/five-quarters/>
 (Saltyard, 2015) and winner of the 2015 André Simon food book award  