
When I was 12, I made scones in Mrs Carrington’s home economics class. I’d 
made them before with my mum, but, after that class, the results of which were 
humped home in a basket and then doled out to my younger brother and sister, I 
became a scone-maker. It wasn’t so much the scones themselves, though my family 
told me they were the best they’d ever eaten – they had risen impressively, 
each expanding like a small accordion. It was more about the process. A penny 
had dropped. Double-checking the recipe, measuring, mixing, pressing out the 
plump rounds and lining them up on a tray ... it was a process I found 
unspeakably soothing. Soothing, but in a very ordinary, everyday way. There 
were also hot scones at the end of it. What’s more, I felt capable, which 
wasn’t how I was feeling about plenty of other things at the time.

I made scones in the morning before school (which went down well), or as soon 
as I got back, apron over my green school uniform. Like the piano scales I was 
also belting out at the time, the process got smoother, the need for a recipe 
disappeared and I got swifter. Scones made while my sister ate her cereal. 
Scones presented to my patient dad, still in his suit days and smelling of 
shaving foam, possibly with bit of loo paper on his cheek blotting a razor 
nick, when all he really wanted was another cup of tea. I was on my way to 
being a baker, and a pianist.

I became neither. My baking has remained at scone-level, give or take a couple 
of cakes and mince pies. I turned out to be one of Mrs Dagel’s more 
disappointing piano students in that, despite early promise, I never really 
mastered those scales, never mind the arpeggios. Baking and arpeggios are 
precise arts. But my love of cooking, a more improvisational – though careful – 
process, dug its heels in, resilient in all sorts of conditions, and most 
tangible for me when it comes to faithful recipes.

Rachel Roddy’s fish with an almond and breadcrumb crust recipe | A kitchen in 
Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/26/fish-with-breadcumb-and-almond-crust-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>
It is surprising that baked stuffed tomatoes – pomodori al riso – have entered 
my group of faithfuls, as the words “stuffed” and “tomatoes” together generally 
makes my heart sink – thanks to some pretty dreary examples, many of which were 
made my me. Even now, when I have discovered they can be delicious, my heart 
can still sink for old times’ sake.Pomodori al riso are beloved in Rome in 
summer. People make them at home, but are just as likely to buy them from a 
bakery, where great trays of tomatoes, surrounded by a sea of potatoes, are 
baked in the bread oven until the rice swells, the shells slump, and the 
potatoes are golden on top and slightly soggy underneath. There is nothing 
flash aboutpomodori al riso.

I can buy pomodori al riso from a great bakery in Testaccio called Passi. I 
also make them at home in a well-practised kitchen routine: scoop, strain, 
season, wait, stuff, bake, wait and wait.

Like so many simple dishes, the key is in the detail, with the little things 
done carefully. I’m not talking perfect piano scales here, but as Simon 
Hopkinson says: “The wish to cook nice things and to take time over them.” 
Remember to salt the tomato shell and leave it upside down, so excess water can 
seep away; strain the pips from the tomato juice; rip the basil and finely chop 
the garlic and make sure the filling is properly seasoned; toss the potatoes 
with plenty of oil and salt. Like roast chicken, Nigel Slater’s double ginger 
cake, small children and myself, stuffed tomatoes are better after a rest: the 
rice plumps up even more and the flavours settle, and the slumping tomato shell 
and potato soak more of the juices. It is a “cook early to eat later” dish for 
a summer arsenal. This means you eat yourpomodori al riso tepid, which I love – 
especially on hot summer days, when food and room are at more or less the same 
temperature, though with a pudding several degrees cooler and served in scoops. 
You can of course eat your tomatoes when you like, or reheat them – it is up to 
you.

Baked stuffed tomatoes with potatoes

Serves 4
8 ripe, firm, fleshy, medium‑size tomatoes
Salt and black pepper
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
8 fresh basil leaves
10 tbsp risotto rice (I use arborio)
100ml extra virgin olive oil, plus more for the potatoes
60g parmesan or pecorino, grated (optional)
1 kg potatoes, cut into short chips

1 Cut the tops off the tomatoes and set them aside. Scoop out the insides – 
flesh, seeds, and juice – into a bowl. Sprinkle a little salt in the cavity of 
each tomato and then put them cut-side down on kitchen towel so excess water 
can drain away.

2 Pass the tomato flesh, seeds and juice through a food mill or sieve, or mush 
it with your hands, pulling out any hard bits. Add the garlic.

3 Rip the basil into small pieces and add it to the tomato juice, along with 
the rice, olive oil and cheese, if using. Season with salt and pepper, to 
taste. Stir, then leave for at least 45 minutes.

4 Toss the potato chips in a little olive oil and sprinkle with salt.

5 Sit the empty tomato husks in a lightly greased oven-proof dish. Spoon the 
rice mix into the shells so they are ¾ full, then put the lids back on. Scatter 
the diced potato around the tomatoes. Bake at 180/350F/gas mark 4 for 40-60 
minutes, or until the tomatoes are soft and starting to shrivel, the rice is 
plump and the potatoes golden. Allow to sit before eating.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award  