
“Everybody has to eat!” Cinzia, is sitting at her sunny kitchen table, reading 
glasses on the end of her nose, telling me about herpasta al forno, or baked 
pasta. It is a dish I have enjoyed many times in her kitchen, the table 
extended as long as it can go and pushed back so as to leave a Cinzia-sized gap 
from which she can serve however many of us – and we are usually many – a plate 
of pasta. I have a photograph somewhere, of Cinzia mid-serve, a cord of melted 
mozzarella stretching from oven dish to plate in everyday symbolism, my son 
Luca leaping up like a small dog trying to get at it.

Back at her table, a generously sized lemon tree almost poking through the 
kitchen door like a nosy neighbour, Cinzia explains why her pasta al forno is 
as it is, how over years of cooking for her family and crowds she has settled 
on the simplest version, just pasta with good tomato sauce, basil, lots of 
mozzarella and pecorino. It is the most relaxed – you could say deconstructed – 
of the baked pasta family, a big, generous, unfussy dish to feed many. There is 
no meat, egg, bechamel, chilli or breadcrumbs, even though they are good 
additions, as they might not agree with everyone – and everyone has to eat! Her 
version means that young, old, vegetarian or particular can eat, because 
everyone likes pasta, tomato sauce and mozzarella, don’t they? I nod, and so 
does the lemon tree.

Cinzia reminds me of my Granny in that she is a great shopper – sharp and 
particular; in fact we met at the old Testaccio market, years ago. I remember 
her, glasses on her nose, examining and sniffing tomatoes (don’t buy a tomato 
unless it smells like a tomato, she says). We became friends, and I began 
spending hours sitting in her kitchen. She is a good and careful cook: not 
precious, just lots of attention for simple tasks, making sure ingredients are 
at the right ripeness and temperature, careful prep, cooking that seems like 
coaxing so as to bring out the best in things. The saying “food is love” is 
true with Cinzia, and the reason why her food, which seems set out to please 
rather than impress, tastes so good. Back in my kitchen, her baked pasta has 
become a firm fixture, especially for almost-summer weekends – long, slow days 
when windows are wide and routines go out of them, so something made earlier to 
bake and eat whenever is welcome. Not only can it be made in advance, once 
baked, this pasta will sit patiently, which is why it is such a trusted one for 
a crowd, the baseline to a buffet that might roll on and on.

Cinzia’s recipe lends itself to all sorts of variations. You could add meat 
either as ragu or tiny meatballs, bechamel, fried chunks of aubergine, 
hard-boiled eggs – it really is up to you. Treat the recipe below as a basic 
template, which you can then fancy up. Be particular about ingredients and find 
a decent quantity of pasta with ridges to collect sauce, and good tomatoes.


Fry the onion slowly with a pinch of salt in good extra-virgin olive oil: you 
are laying foundations. Then cook the tomatoes until the flavours are 
concentrated, which will take more or less time depending on the tomatoes. 
Mozzarella should be firmed up, so at least a couple of days old. Basil, a 
fragrant and ballsy keynote of summer, is important: you want a bunch with 
fleshy, floppy leaves that give out an almost violently rich smell as you rip 
them.

If you serve the baked pasta very hot, the melted mozzarella pulls into great 
long strings. Wait a while and the stretches may not be quite so impressive, 
but the flavour is better. Italians are often happy to eat this quite cool, and 
they are generally plate separatists; one thing at a time. I love a great pile 
of green salad with this, a mix of crisp and bitter leaves, herbs, possibly a 
flower, dressed with olive oil, salt, and lemon from Cinzia’s nosy tree. The 
last portion of pasta, eaten a few hours later straight from the dish, is 
possibly the best.

Pasta al forno di Cinzia (Cinzia’s baked pasta)

Keeping in mind everyone has to eat, you could make this with gluten-free 
pasta, and no cheese, just make sure the tomato sauce is superb and there is 
lots of wine to drink.

Serves 4–6
A small white onion
1.2kg ripe tomatoes or 3 x 400 g tins of good quality peeled plum tomatoes
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt
A pinch of dried red chilli flakes (optional)
500g short pasta: mezze maniche, rigatoni, penne, or macaroni work well
500g mozzarella, drained
100g parmesan or pecorino
A handful of fresh basil
Breadcrumbs (optional)

1 Take an onion and chop it finely. Prepare the tomatoes. If you are using 
fresh ones, peel them by plunging them into boiling water for a minute, then 
cold water, at which point the skins should slip away, then chop them roughly. 
If you are using tinned plum tomatoes, use scissors to snip them up in the tin.

2 Warm the oil in a large, heavy-based pan, add the onion and a pinch of salt 
and cook gently until soft and translucent. Then add the tomatoes, and chilli, 
bring to a gentle boil and then reduce to a simmer for 20–30 minutes (adding 
the basil in the last 5 minutes), stirring every now and then, until the sauce 
is rich and thick. You can leave the sauce as is, pass it through the food mill 
or blast it cautiously with an immersion bender so it is smooth. Taste and add 
salt. If the sauce is slightly sharp, redress the balance with a little sugar.

Rachel Roddy’s braised chicken with tomatoes and vinegar recipe | A Kitchen in 
Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/17/braised-chicken-with-tomatoes-vinegar-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>
3 Bring a large pan of water to the boil, add salt and then the pasta. Check 
the cooking time on the packet, then divide this in half as you want the pasta 
half-cooked. Set the timer. When it goes off, drain quickly. Mix the pasta with 
half the tomato sauce, and set the rest aside. Slice the mozzarella and grate 
the parmesan or pecorino.

4 Oil an ovenproof dish, make a layer of pasta and sauce, then zig-zag over a 
little more sauce. Make a layer of mozzarella, with a few basil leaves, then 
sprinkle over some cheese. Repeat the layers until you have finished all the 
ingredients, but finish with a healthy layer of sauce and parmesan – with 
breadcrumbs too if you like.

5 Bake in a preheated oven at 180C/350F/gas mark 4 for 20 minutes, or until 
the sides bubble, the edges of the pasta are crisp and the top is crusty and 
golden. Eat hot, or at room temperature.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award
 