
A tavola, la carbonara è pronta (“to the table, the carbonara is ready”), a 
woman shouted in flinty Roman from a window. She was shouting to a pair of 
teenagers smoking in the corner of the internal courtyard, amotorino that had 
clearly seen some action next to them. The woman then pulled in washing pinned 
to a three-tier washing rack – which had also seen some action – hanging like a 
triple chin below the windowsill. A bunch of kids, several of whom I knew from 
my son’s school, charged into the courtyard. A boy crashed into me, then pegged 
it, leaving a half sorry/half laugh scusa signora in his wake. (Will I ever 
stop missing the wordsignorina?) The whole scene felt like a cliche, or simply 
a postcard from a bright, echoing courtyard in Testaccio. It also leaves me 
wanting carbonara.

Carbonara is one of four quintessential Roman pasta dishes, along with 
amatriciana (cured pork, tomatoes, pecorino), gricia (cured pork and pecorino) 
andcacio e pepe (pecorino and lots of black pepper). Carbonara is a dish that 
sums up the beauty of Roman food: simple, not fussy, confident, good.

Rachel Roddy’s roast tomatoes with breadcrumbs | A kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/07/roast-tomatoes-breadcrumbs>
It is also a good example of a pasta dish in which the sauce is inseparable 
from the pasta. It’s a dish whose elements – cured pork with its fat, eggs, 
cheese and a slosh of starchy pasta cooking water – come together to form a 
pale yellow cream on the strands of spaghetti or ribbed tubes of rigatoni. It 
is simple, but requires practice, which I don’t say in order to be offputting, 
just honest.

The key to carbonara is understanding what happens and when: that if you put 
drained pasta into a pan with hot pork fat at the right moment, add beaten eggs 
and grated cheese and enough pasta cooking water, then pull the hot pan from 
the heat and stir purposefully, you should get a creamy sauce that clings 
possessively to each tube. Having understood this, you’ll also understand the 
need for practice – it can’t possibly be any other way. Through practice you 
will notice how the cured pork renders and how much fat there is, which will of 
course vary with each piece of pork and which pan you are using.

Practice will help you find the best arrangement of pan, utensils (I like a 
wooden spoon and a wooden fork), vessel (cup) for the reserved cooking water so 
as to make the sequence as straightforward as possible. Most of all, practice 
helps you become familiar with the sequence of movements: frying the pork until 
the fat has rendered, tipping the drained pasta into the hot fat, lifting the 
hot pan from the heat, adding the egg mixture and cooking water (a small 
teacup-full for me), the purposeful stir – almost a beating, you will hear a 
soft thwack. You are watching for the moment when the considerable residual 
heat of the rendered fat and your stirring thickens the egg into a batter-like 
sauce which clings to the pasta. The pasta should slip, not clump. Carbonara 
eureka. Of course, there is always a chance you will scramble the egg or flood 
the pasta with too much water – this is frustrating, but the results are still 
edible. And isn’t this how our hands and eyes learn?

In Rome, guanciale (cured pig’s cheek) is traditionally used for carbonara; 
aficionados claim it is indispensable. That said, quite a few Romans I know 
prefer pancetta. If you can’t find either, fatty bacon works too. It is up to 
you if you want to add a little olive oil to the pan to get the rendering 
started. As for cheese, the distinctive sheep’s milk pecorino romano, with its 
salty, piquant punch, is the one. Parmesan works too though. I like a mix of 
pecorino and parmesan. Shouting “to the table, the carbonara is ready,” is 
optional.

The classic carbonara recipe

Serves 4
150g guanciale, pancetta or bacon
A little olive oil (optional)
450g spaghetti or rigatoni
2 large eggs, and two extra yolks
80g finely grated pecorino romano, or parmesan, or a mixture of both
Salt and freshly ground pepper

1 Bring a large pan of water to a rolling boil for the pasta. Cut the cured 
pork into short, thick strips and fry in a little olive oil, if using, until 
the fat has rendered and the pieces are golden. Remove the pan from the heat.

2 Salt the boiling water, stir, add the pasta and cook until al dente, which 
means “to the tooth” – so firm (check the packet, and start tasting at least 2 
minutes before the end of the cooking time).

3 While the pasta is cooking, beat together the eggs, yolks, cheese, a tiny 
pinch of salt (the salt in the pasta water and cheese has this covered) and 
black pepper, and whisk together. When the pasta is nearly ready, heat up the 
meat pan again, removing most of the strips of pork to a warm plate. The fat 
should be hot.

4 Remove a cupful of pasta cooking water then drain the pasta and tip into the 
hot pan and stir. Pull the pan from the flame and add the egg mixture, a good 
slosh of pasta cooking water, and stir and swish vigorously until you have a 
soft golden cream. Add the reserved pork and stir again. If it seems too dry or 
clumpy, add a bit more cooking water and stir vigorously again. Divide between 
plates and serve immediately.

• Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290678/s/five-quarters/>
 (Saltyard, 2015) and winner of the 2015 André Simon food book award

•This article was amended on 22 June to include black pepper in the recipe’s 
method.
 