
Rafael Nadal, for all the thunderous groundstrokes he will unleash against 
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> in the men's 
final this morning, knows that his greatness hangs by a mere thread or, more 
correctly, a piece of synthetic string. Not quite true – but the importance of 
new man-made strings to the way Nadal and other ­leading professionals have 
changed the way tennis is played is becoming increasingly evident.

"Luxilon has changed the game so much," Rodney Harmon, a former tour player 
who now works for the USTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Association, says of one of the brands of polyester string that has seen a 
sharp rise in its popularity among the pros. "Guys can move back on returns and 
take huge swipes. The ball spins like a gyroscope and it's almost too difficult 
to volley. That's why you don't have any pure serve-and-volleyers any more."

Some even reckon that this latest generation of strings has had a greater 
influence on opening up the game to the relentlessly aggressive brand of tennis 
that Nadal specialises in, and with which he finally subdued Fernando Verdasco 
in Friday's marathon semi-final, than the more frequently cited space-age 
materials used in racket manufacture. "I don't think racket technology has made 
much of a difference," Harold Solomon, a French Open finalist in 1976 and now a 
leading coach in the US, told the American magazineTennis recently, "but I do 
think strings such as Luxilon have enabled players to hit the ball as hard as 
they can and still keep the ball in the court."

He might also have mentioned Pro Hurricane Tour, another of the so-called 
monofilament strings that Nadal uses for his Babolat racket.

Nadal, 22, the world number one who last year won the French, Wimbledon and 
Olympic titles and needs victory today to land his first grand-slam title on a 
hard court, is the child of the string and racket technology that has 
fundamentally altered the way professional tennis is played, even if players 
who favour touch over relentless turbo-charged hitting – notably Federer and 
Andy Murray – can still flourish.

Not so long ago, in the days when a right-hander's classical forehand involved 
gliding athletically into the ball with the left foot thrust forward to take 
the body's weight, Nadal's muscular physique would have been of little 
relevance. Now, thanks to the technology, the top professionals play the 
forehand very differently, opening up their stance to smash the ball with all 
their might, like a boxer delivering a haymaker. Using an extreme western grip 
(the hand held underneath the handle rather than on top or behind it) to rip up 
behind the ball, the player unloads a shot that not only travels fast but also 
with huge of top spin and a looped trajectory that reduces the risk of the ball 
ending up in the net.

The change in technology that laid the foundation for Nadal's style of tennis 
was the move away from wooden rackets in the mid-1960s. Then natural gut 
strings were replaced, a trend that has gathered such pace in recent years that 
some estimates reckon the polyester-based Luxilon string is now used by two 
thirds of the top 100 men and nearly half the women in the world's top 100.

Interestingly, these high numbers seem to have more to do with players' gut 
feeling, as it were, than scientific evidence, which is inconclusive. The 
endorsements of Solomon and Harmon are based on experience and hearsay, as is 
that of Roman Prokes, who has strung and customised rackets for Andy Roddick 
and Maria Sharapova. "I think Luxilon is the biggest change in the game since 
graphite rackets," Prokes has said, touting the control and bite it exerts on 
the ball.

Professor Rod Cross, of the University of Sydney, probably the leading 
academic expert in these matters, is more circumspect. He doubts that strings 
make as much difference as rackets. "My educated guess is that wider rackets 
increased the spin by a factor of three, while polyester adds perhaps five per 
cent more spin on top of that – compared with nylon and gut," Cross says.

What is beyond question is that the way tennis is played has changed almost 
beyond recognition in the past 35 years. Rick Macci, a top US coach, says: 
"Rackets now are like AK-47s. Everybody is hitting the ball harder and heavier. 
You might have a bigger serve, but you also have a bigger return." You also have
Rafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> – and how Federer 
deals with him today will, again, be ­fascinating.
 