
Rafael Nadal is scowling again. That is great news for tennis fans who might 
have thought their hero's passion and zest had dimmed a little in a relatively 
downbeat stretch over the past few months. And it is possibly not the best news 
forRoger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>.

Their first semi-final in a slam for seven years on Thursday will be the most 
significant collision of thisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> to this point, and the 
Spaniard has rediscovered his tigerish championship game at just the right time.

The Swiss, who has been majestic all the way, never more so than in dismissing 
Juan Martín del Potro in the earlier quarter-final in the crushing afternoon 
heat, will probably start favourite to reach the final. But there will not be 
much in it. The last time they met here was in final of 2009, Rafa's year of 
magic.

"That is one of the finals that will always be in my mind," Nadal said after 
completing a draining 6-7, 7-6, 6-4, 6-3 win over Tomas Berdych in 
four-and-a-quarter hours, almost half the time he had taken in total in his 
first four matches.

In his halting, charming English, Nadal got to the heart of his rivalry with 
Federer – one that was briefly mired in acrimony at the start of this 
tournament, because of their differing views of industrial action to press the 
case for reforms on the Tour, but swayed back towards respect over subsequent 
days.

"The ranking is important but we are talking about a player who won 16 grand 
slams and I won 10. We played a lot of matches, in very important moments for 
our careers, and very high moments. So the match is special.

"But for everything, for what represents the match, all the matches against 
him are special and will be special even if we are 20 against 25."

Rod Laver watched on Monday night in the arena named after him, as the 
Spaniard came back from perilous situations in the first two sets; Federer said 
earlier he planned to watch it on television in his hotel room, not something 
he always bothers to do. He will surely have been impressed.

The Swiss's win – in his 1,000th Tour match – was too one-sided to enthral and 
it was unfortunate Del Potro could not find the game that so dazzled his peers 
in 2009 when, before a wrist injury cut him down, he was good enough to beat 
Federer in the final of the US Open as well as in the World Tour Finals. Here, 
he could only manage to keep the world No3 on court for a minute under two 
hours.

A smattering of boos sliced through the warm night air for Berdych when he 
entered Rod Laver Arena; the ugly memory of his refusal to shake hands with 
Nadal's compatriot Nicolás Almagro this week – after the Spaniard had slammed a 
volley at him – obviously has not faded for many people. Perhaps Nadal was 
among their number. Not that he ever struggles for friends, but the crowd were 
with him from the start, especially so when he gave the toss coin to the little 
boy chosen to spin it for serve, which went to the Czech.

Apart from his mystery tendon-pinch injury while sitting on a chair in his 
hotel room last week (his right knee has been heavily strapped since), he was 
in good shape. He had had a smooth run to the quarters, spending a mere eight 
hours and 35 minutes over his four easy wins. Nobody got closer than four games 
to him in any of the 12 sets. There would be no such failure of purpose on 
Berdych's part.

With three grams extra weight near the top of his racket when he arrived in 
Australia, Nadal was looking for more raw power on the slowest of the hard 
courts, although there has not been much evidence of it. It was Berdych who did 
the early bullying.

At 5-5 in the tie-break, he hit long but there was no call by line judge or 
umpire. Nadal baulked after hitting the return and challenged a split second 
late while moving across the baseline – but the moment had gone, and the 
Spaniard had made a proper mess of it. When Berdych aced to take the set, Nadal 
was clearly rattled – but fired up also.

Uncharacteristically, he indulged in an angry exchange with the chair umpire 
Carlos Bernárdez, a Spanish-speaking Brazilian and one of the best officials in 
the business.

"You're not a spectator," Nadal told him at the changeover, suggesting 
Bernárdez should have been more pro-active; it paid a dividend of sorts, as 
Bernárdez subsequently corrected at least half a dozen poor line calls, which 
has been a bugbear of the tournament.

In a highly charged atmosphere when tempers might have boiled over, Berdych 
(not the calmest of players under pressure) grabbed a break point at the start 
of the second, but could not capitalise. This was a knife-edge match now, with 
tempers and judgment near fraying point.

The challenge jitters hit Berdych and, as he had used all three for the set 
and was trailing 30-40 on serve and 2-1, he was left without the option on a 
vital close call. Nadal rubbed it in with a delightful volley to break and the 
momentum swung his way at last. He drew further away on his serve, and Berdych 
needed to settle and start again.

Nadal gave him the opening with some underpowered serving at 5-3 up before 
faltering then fighting back to secure another tie-break. It was Berdych's 
fifth in a row, his seventh of the tournament and he had yet to be bettered. 
Not this time. He hit long on the 14th point and Nadal's joy mingled with 
relief as he wrapped up a set that was there on a plate for him half an hour 
earlier.

Nadal did not win 10 slam titles by failing to smell apprehension. And that 
was what he sensed when he broke Berdych to go 3-2 up. After playing some great 
points and hitting some wonderful shots behind a big first serve, Berdych's 
level dropped in keeping with his growing frustration.

When the Mallorcan smashed a back-leaning winner to take the third, his box 
took on the look of a travelling disco – even his rarely seen football-famous 
uncle Miguel Angel "The Beast" Nadal was hopping about like a teenager.

When he hit an outrageous running forehand to break at the start of the 
fourth, well, they might as well have stayed on their feet, because the 
celebrations remained in full swing all the way to the end.

Just about on the stroke of midnight, Nadal broke Berdych to love to win the 
match, finishing the job with his iron-wristed forehand, and any bad blood that 
had flowed between them was forgotten. Berdych wiped the slate clean with his 
courage and Nadal found again the unique spirit that makes him so special.

"I try my best in every moment," Nadal said. It is his mantra. Now it has 
substance again.
 