
Rafael Nadal survived a serious examination by Grigor Dimitrov to reach the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> semi-finals.

The Spaniard began the match as the only member of the world's top three in 
either the men's or women's draw still in the tournament, and for a long time 
his place looked far from secure.

Nadal did not find anything like his best form throughout the match but 
Dimitrov's inexperience showed at the crucial moments.

The 22-year-old held three set points in the third set but missed them all and 
it was Nadal who moved through to the last four with a 3-6, 7-6, 7-6, 6-2 
victory.

"I was so lucky," said Nadal. "Especially on one set point, he missed an easy 
one. The fourth set was for me and I'm very happy for that. I love this 
tournament. I'm very happy to be in the semi-finals after missing it last year. 
I suffered a lot."

This has been a breakthrough grand slam for Dimitrov, who is beginning to come 
up with results to match his considerable talent.

He had never previously been beyond the third round at a slam but looked at 
home on Rod Laver Arena as he broke the Nadal serve at the first opportunity.

The Spaniard had struggled against Kei Nishikori in round four, with a large 
blister on the palm of his left hand proving particularly troublesome. Whether 
that was the reason or not, he certainly could not find his usual feel on the 
ball.
 Nadal receives medical treatment to a blister on his hand. Photograph: Andrew 
Brownbill/AP 
Dimitrov, who had won sets in all their three previous meetings, capitalised, 
hitting back from 0-30 down with four straight points to serve out the first 
set, clinching it with an ace.

It was the first set Nadal had lost all tournament but, despite having to have 
his blister retaped, the Spaniard held on to an eventual win.

He admitted afterwards the blister had troubled him. "Especially with the 
serve," he said. "The rest of the things are more or less fine but I feel like 
on the serve I can [drop] the racket.

"It's fine, I am going to try to keep improving it tomorrow. The blister is 
much better but if I am not playing with that protection it is much worse."

The Bulgarian sobbed into his towel before picking up his bags to leave but he 
vowed to come back stronger and admitted: "Of course I shed a few tears, but it 
should hurt and it does hurt. I can take a lot of things [out of his 
performance] but at the moment I'm just a bit all over the place.

"I'm deeply disappointed. I'm not going to lie. But I have to take the 
positives and the negatives out of the match and just kind of move on."
 