
In a couple of those courtside television interviews that seem frivolous at 
the time, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal were asked separately at the start of 
thisAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> what 
part of the other's game they would like to have for their own. Each said the 
forehand. Nadal might like to rethink that one.

On Rod Laver Arena, the shot the Swiss has used for most of his 14 years on 
the Tour to master nearly everyone in the game malfunctioned at enough key 
moments to allow Nadal to beat him for the 18th time in 27 contests and advance 
to the final on Sunday against the winner of Friday's semi-final between Andy 
Murray and Novak Djokovic.

Nadal won 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4 in three hours and 42 minutes. The 
more intriguing statistics were these: Federer, in trying to break down the 
Spaniard's phenomenal retrieving, hit 63 unforced errors, of which 36 of them 
were on his fabled forehand.

If Friday's match equals this rare semi-final between the game's two most 
committed rivals (they have not met at this stage of a grand slam tournament 
since 2005), Melbourne Park patrons will have been well served in an era as 
good as any, with the leading four players in tennis fighting out the first 
major of the season.

It was not a pretty sight to see Federer's normally killer forehand collapse – 
except from Nadal's side of the net, no doubt. They have met a record eight 
times in slam finals and, while this was not in the same class as some of 
those, it was rich enough in drama to be worthy of a title-decider.

When Federer lost faith in his forehand, he went to the net; when he went to 
the net, quite often Nadal passed him. Nadal, meanwhile, would not trust his 
backhand and some times left too much acreage to cover by running around his 
forehand (of his 34 unforced errors, 19 came on the backhand). It made for an 
enthralling duel.

Federer won the first three games of the match and looked as serene as he had 
done all tournament, going on to take the first set in a tie-break.

Nadal, head down, right knee strapped, gasped for inspiration. He found it 
from an unusual source.

When they hit the pause button to let Melbourne celebrate Australia Day with 
the nation's ingrained fireworks fetish (and quite spectacular the show was, 
too), Federer, at the time trailing Nadal 5-2 in the second set, might have 
been grateful.

Nadal was coming at him like a wounded bull. The calmest man in tennis could 
do with calming things down. But then the fireworks resumed – on court. The 
Spaniard exploded as only he can and blasted Federer to nil to take the set.

Their body language, as ever, fascinated. "Roger walking around the locker 
room is completely different to Rafa, who is doing chest jumps everywhere," 
Lleyton Hewitt revealed. On court it was little different. Both men played in 
tune with their personality.

And this was the fiery pre-Djokovic Nadal, not the one who moped to unfamiliar 
defeat too often for his liking in 2011, complaining he had lost his "passion 
for tennis". The player whose spirit undeniably had been dented by the Serb's 
dominance of him in six finals, now was rejuvenated against the one opponent 
who consistently brings the best out in him.

Nadal had Federer at 0-40 at the start of the third, but couldn't convert. 
They went back on even terms until Federer grabbed a break point at 3-3 and, to 
the amazement of the packed arena, screamed and pumped in the most 
un-Roger-like way. Nadal was tight in the deuce battle. He served his first 
double fault and dropped serve when the backhand he does not fully trust hit 
the net halfway down.

It was up to Nadal to reignite his fightback; Federer helped him with his 
fifth double fault in the eighth game and the world No2 got two break points 
back with another startling cross-court winner. Federer, normally so commanding 
when in front, buckled again, his running forehand failing to clear the chord.

When they reached 5-5, there was nothing in it. They got to a second 
tie-break. Heartbeats raced, on court and in the seats. Nadal, reining in his 
passion, played conservatively. Federer, desperate, saved two set points on his 
opponent's serve to get to 3-6, then 4-6. Nadal, serving for the set, forced 
yet another limp forehand reply from Federer and, after two hours and 47 
minutes, was a set away from reaching the final.

Here is a killer stat: whoever of them has won the third set when they play 
each other has gone on to win five times out of five. Could Federer defy their 
personal history?

Federer was weakening. He saved four break points in the ninth game but could 
not manage a fifth, this time a backhand straying wide – and Nadal served for 
the match.

The final line of the story read like a microcosm of this curious match. 
Federer nets a forehand: 15-0 Nadal; he dinks a sublime drop shot: 15-15; 
another forehand goes long: 30-15; now Nadal pushes a forehand wide: 30-all; 
Federer's backhand return goes long: 40-30 and match point; Nadal's crosscourt 
backhand is just wide: deuce; Nadal runs around his forehand, and hits long: 
advantage Federer; Federer's round-arm sliced forehand, under no pressure, goes 
long and wide: deuce; Nadal nets a backhand: advantage Federer, second break 
point; Federer backhand return to wide serve hits net: third deuce; Federer 
backhand from deep way out: advantage Nadal and second match point; Federer 
hits his 36th unforced error on the forehand and Nadal is in the final.

Federer left the court as slowly as he ever has. He's gone eight majors 
without a title. He is 30.

Nadal, left on court to luxuriate in a tough win of some significance, said: 
"It is always an honour to play Roger. I wish him all the best for the season. 
It's just amazing. Fantastic to have one player in front of you with a totally 
complete game. I always keep learning, with one player better than me."

It was generous – but for how much longer will it be relevant?
 