
7.45am GMT 

Nadal injury update...

He says his hand injury isn't too bad but definitely affects his serve. He 
says the blister is fine but he needs to keep it protected during matches. 

7.44am GMT 

Nadal looks very relieved...

... and well he might. Dimitrov started the match brilliantly but Nadal's 
experience won out in the tiebreaks, and the Bulgarian was never the same after 
he missed set point in the third. Nadal is typically gracious in victory saying 
his opponent will be a "great champion" one day. Of the tiebreak he says "I was 
so lucky" to laughter around the court, and then admits he "suffered a lot".

7.39am GMT 

Fourth set: Dimitrov 2-6 Nadal. NADAL WINS THREE SETS TO ONE

Dimitrov trudged to his chair after losing the last without even a hint of a 
skip, or a twinkle in his eye. He looks like a man who knows the match is up, 
Rafa has been in firm control this set. And Rafa goes up 0-15 through another, 
you guessed it, unforced error from his opponent. Dimitrov has been dictating 
this game for good and bad. Rafa takes it to match point, charging in to bully 
a backhand past Dimitrov, who is stranded midcourt. Dimitrov saves, pushing and 
pulling Rafa across the court before the Spaniard dumps a forehand into the 
net. Dimitrov savesanother match point, scorching a forehand past Nadal after 
pinning him to the baseline. And another. This is impressive, if a little 
repetitive. And on the fourth attempt Nadal closes it out as Dimitrov misses 
his target. 

7.31am GMT 

Fourth set: *Dimitrov 2-5 Nadal (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

Yep, Rafa has held easily throughout this set and does so to love here. 
Dimitrov will have to raise his game several levels if he's going to stay in 
this match. 

7.29am GMT 

Fourth set: Dimitrov 2-4 Nadal* (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

Well, Dimitrov continues to miss shots down the line but that shows he hasn't 
curbed his aggression, despite the mental knocks he has suffered in the two 
tiebreaks. He's hit 52 winners to Rafa's 39 today. Dimitrov holds and he's 
looked better in the last two games. Running out of chances to break though...

7.24am GMT 

Fourth set: *Dimitrov 1-4 Nadal (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

Rafa chews his lip with concentration as he opens the game, it doesn't do him 
much good though as Dimitrov wins the point. maybe we're starting to see the 
toll this match is taking on Dimitrov has he dumps a volley into the net and 
then sends another shot long. Rafa sends down his seventh double fault - his 
most in any match at anAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> but still hangs on.

7.19am GMT 

Fourth set: Dimitrov 1-3* Nadal (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

The atmosphere has flattened as Rafa has taken control of this set, and the 
match. Anyway, Dimitrov reminds us he's still here with a lovely drop shot to 
make it 40-15, a shot indeed that even has Rafa's camp clapping. 

7.15am GMT 

Fourth set: Dimitrov *0-3 Nadal (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

Dimitrov has missed some easy chances in the last hour or so but they've been 
lazy shots rather than nervy, a lack of technique rather than nerve. Rafa 
certainly hasn't been at his best but he does have a gaping wound on his hand, 
so we'll forgive him. "Tennis," one of my colleagues notes as he walks past the 
TV. And he's right. Rafa holds. 

7.11am GMT 

Fourth set: Dimitrov 0-2 Nadal* (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

Grigor works out some frustration from that last tiebreak with a nice juicy 
ace to start the game. He misses three presentable forehands (see last 
tiebreak) as it goes to deuce and after more than 10 minutes Rafa breaks. That 
game was deucier than an orange grove. 

7.01am GMT 

Fourth set: *Dimitrov 0-1 Nadal (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2-1 in 
sets

My oh my. Dimitrov had several chances to win the last set, will he be able to 
recover from that knowledge? Or will it gnaw at him like a hungry rat. If it 
was me I'd be on the rat option. Then again, Nadal is still getting his hand 
taped from that injury we saw earlier. Sadly, he hasn't gone for Transformers 
Plasters, the heathen. Grigor's first point isn't that impressive as he sends a 
looping forehand long. Bizarrely, Rafa has taken to smacking his injured hand 
with his racquet between points. Maybe he's regretting not going with the 
Transformers. 

6.53am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: Dimitrov 7-9 Nadal (* denotes next server). Nadal leads 2 
sets to 1

Rafa has to serve to stay in the set, his serve sends Dimitrov wide and he 
can't get back into the point after that. A volley saves Rafa. The ball then 
spins off the net and Nadal is now on set point. Oh, and then Dimitrov sends an 
easy forehand wide to hand the set to Rafa. A tense tiebreak, with some awful 
tennis.

6.50am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: Dimitrov 7-6 Nadal* (* denotes next server)

Dimitrov has all the space in the world (well a few metres of Rod Laver Arena) 
to crunch a shot down the line but sends it wide like he wasRafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>. Both players have been nervy 
in this tiebreak. Dimitrov takes some time to collect himself and a superb 
volley makes it 7-6

6.48am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: *Dimitrov 6-5 Nadal (* denotes next server)

Rafa hoovers up a lax shot from his opponent and sends a stinging shot down 
the line. Or rather wide of the line. And does it again! Now Dimitrov serves 
for the set!

6.46am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: Dimitrov 4-5 Nadal* (* denotes next server)

Dimitrov challenges a call that looked long, was called long and ... is long. 
Rafa serves for the set...

6.45am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: *Dimitrov 3-4 Nadal (* denotes next server)

A VERY long baseline rally to start Rafa's serves but Dimitrov loses his 
rhythm like a drunken drummer at a crucial point and sends a forehand long. 
Nadal's experience is showing when the pressure is on. Or is it? Unforced error 
and Dimitrov breaks back. Yikes!

6.42am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: Dimitrov 2-3 Nadal* (* denotes next server)

Mini-break to Rafa after a ludicrous rally, which includes a between the legs 
baseline shot from Dimitrov. 

Updated at 6.42am GMT

6.41am GMT 

Third set tiebreak: *Dimitrov 1-2 Nadal (* denotes next server)

Dimitrov serves first and holds with a crosscourt forehand. He really should 
have won this set already. Rafa holds too after his opponent plops a forehand 
short and Nadal gobbles the chance. 

Updated at 6.41am GMT

6.39am GMT 

Third set, currently 1-1 in sets: *Dimitrov 6-6 Nadal (* denotes next server)

Rafa needs to hold this game (obviously) but immediately drops to 0-15 (bad 
Rafa). Still, he hasn’t won 843 grand slams for nothing and comes back with 
some good play at the net before a scorching forehand from Dimitrov takes it to 
30-30. Rafa then spoons a volley long with an gaping court in front of him to 
bring up set point for Dimitrov. The Bulgarian does a bit of (non-sexual) 
spooning himself to let Rafa off the hook though and Rafa takes the game when 
Dimitrov nets. Tiebreak! 

6.33am GMT 

Third set, currently 1-1 in sets: Dimitrov 6-5 Nadal* (* denotes next server)

Hello, Geoff is off for his tea so I will take you through to the end of the 
match. Nadal has been shaky so far but it’s Dimitrov who has had the more 
unforced errors, he could easily be two sets up if he had played more 
carefully. He goes to 40-30 with a lovely drop volley and then takes the game. 
Tiebreak anyone? Rafa says yes. 

6.32am GMT 

Third set, currently 1-1 in sets: Dimitrov 6-5 Nadal* (* denotes next server)



 Hello, Geoff is off for his tea so I will take you through to the end of the 
match. Nadal has been shaky so far but it’s Dimitrov who has had the more 
unforced errors, he could easily be two sets up if he had played more 
carefully. He goes to 40-30 with a lovely drop volley and then takes the game. 
Tiebreak anyone? Rafa says yes. 

6.27am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov 5-5 Nadal*

Nadal on serve now, and making life difficult enough for Dimitrov, with more 
unforced errors. Nadal wins the first three points without much investment, 
then again attacks the backhand, drawing the weak lofted slice, and punishes 
it. Holds to love.

Righto, Geoff Lemon out of the commentary chair, and Tom Lutz will be here to 
guide you through the rest of this match.

6.24am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov* 5-4 Nadal

Dimitrov positively mows through the next game to make it 5-4! Barely a shot 
was played. Heading for another tie-break here.

6.21am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov 4-4 Nadal*

It's interesting going here. Neither of these players has really clicked 
today, Nadal with his palm injury and Dimitrov with the yips on some of his 
shots. But they've still produced some spectacular points. Now Nadal is making 
a couple more errors to hand Dimitrov 0-30 on serve, before producing a great 
wide serve before wrong-footing his opponent to play through the empty court. 
Dimitrov gets two break points though, as Nadal hits the next point long...

Saves one! A deep shot sends Dimitrov sprawling to get a racquet to it, he 
recovered well and got in to return Nadal's drop shot, but Nadal was at the net 
to punt it back. Nadal misses his first serve on the next... then double faults 
to hand Dimitrov the break back! Well, the double has done him in a few times 
today.

6.15am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov* 3-4 Nadal

Dimitrov is still smashing through on serve, forcing Nadal errors and 
finishing with an ace. He holds to 15. 

6.13am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov 2-4 Nadal*

Nadal quickly to 30-0 on his serve, but blazes long to let Dimitrov in. 
Dimitrov has been adept at blazing long today, and returns the favour. But 
there's another double fault from Nadal, he's produced quite a few today. He 
gets his serve back, it's slow, but he takes Dimitrov's return and powers the 
forehand into the far corner to round out the game and lock in his break.

6.08am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov* 2-3 Nadal

Dimitrov ain't done with this hot-cold game yet. He drives to the net for a 
big overhead smash winner, then double faults. Serves a barely-there let, then 
ends a rally with another forehand into the net. A rare miss on his first serve 
is followed by another missed attempt at the drop shot, from way behind the 
baseline. Nadal still playing shallow, but Dimitrov can't take advantage. Two 
break points...

Nadal spares him one by playing long after another lengthy rally. Dimitrov 
holding it together. Started missing some serves now, though, and Nadal pounces 
on the second, smashing a return that Dimitrov can only net. Break of serve in 
the third!

6.03am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov 2-2 Nadal*

Nadal working Dimitrov beautifully in this game, moves to 30-0 on serve by 
dragging him round the court. Dimitrov's returns were pretty token there. Nadal 
misses a crosscourt forehand, though, then nets the next after being caught out 
of position, and it's 30-30.

Big chance now! Break point for Dimitrov after a bad run of points from Nadal. 
But he saves the break point with a booming forehand that Dimitrov can't 
return. Then he drills an ace down the line, and duly wins the game with a 
gentle drop shot over the net.

5.55am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov* 2-1 Nadal

It's not just that Dimitrov is hitting a lot of unforced errors, it's that 
he's hitting massive ones. Really bad mis-hits that have looped way into the 
air or run along the ground. There's another such short to give up the first 
point of his service game, but he takes back the next three. He's serving 
beautifully - 89 per cent of first serves in - but struggling when the points 
go long. Nadal takes one back for 40-30. Dimitrov trying sliced backhands, but 
Nadal kept spinning it higher, and eventually Dimitrov could only lob the ball 
in, and Nadal charged the net to drive. Deuce.

Advantage taken by Dimitrov, though, as Nadal clubs wide from a great chance. 
Then a ripper of a passing shot from Dimitrov to seal the game as he 
wrong-foots Nadal. Came back well under pressure there.

5.50am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov 1-1 Nadal*

Dimitrov has some booming voices supporting him in the crowd, and he wins the 
first point as Nadal hits wide. Another Dimitrov error squares the ledger. 
There's a scorcher from Nadal that should have been a winner, but Dimitrov 
somehow got it back, then sprinted the width of the court to return another 
near-winner, before Nadal just got an uncontrolled lob to land in the vacant 
side of the court. Next up, a forehand down the line unsettles Dimitrov, who 
was waiting for the backhand, and he can only push the next return into the 
net. One game apiece in the third.

5.47am GMT 

Third set: Dimitrov* 1-0 Nadal

Well, Dimitrov powered to 40-0, then messed up a volley on his toes to give 
Nadal back a point. Jim Courier is talking about "overcoming disappointment and 
responding like a warrior," which frankly seems a trifle overstated when we're 
talking about a large game of badminton. Nonetheless, Dimitrov does overcome 
his disappointment to win this first game, rather like a professional tennis 
player.

5.44am GMT 

Roaring

Well, didn't Nadal love that last winner, and didn't he love saving that set. 
He roared into the ground like a lion to a Rebound Ace wildebeest.

Apparently we're getting a lot of readers from India, and not surprisingly 
from Bulgaria. So, hello India! And hello Bulgaria. We stand, impartially, with 
you.

5.41am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Dimitrov* 3-7 Nadal

What a winner! Perfect touch off Nadal's backhand to pull off a half-volley, 
crosscourt, across the front of Dimitrov, on a ridiculous angle. Again Dimitrov 
had tried to drop that ball over the net, but Nadal was too quick for him.

One set apiece! The classic is on.

5.39am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Dimitrov 3-6 Nadal*

Great serve-and-volley from Nadal, follows up the wide serve with a charging 
volley to an open court. He serves long on his next point, throws in a weak 
second serve, but works the rally to offer him a forehand winner. 

5.38am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Dimitrov* 3-4 Nadal

Beautiful wide ace from Dimitrov, he's had no trouble with those today. The 
next point, Nadal gets the wide return back, but eventually hits wide after a 
long rally. 

5.36am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Dimitrov 1-4 Nadal*

Again dumped into the net on the forehand by Dimitrov, as Nadal serves. His 
unforced errors are racking up. That makes 27 so far. 28 now, as he can't 
return Nadal's cross-court forehand.

5.34am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Dimitrov* 1-2 Nadal

Double fault from Dimitrov for his first service point! Then he charges the 
net to slam a winner on his second.

5.34am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Dimitrov 0-1 Nadal*

A fault, then a slow second serve that Dimitrov slices into the net.

5.32am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov* 6-6 Nadal

Dimitrov into the net on serve to drive a forehand winner. He is serving like 
a beast. A beast who can serve. He's also playing with some delicate touch, 
some slices helping him work to the net, then a drop shot winner to move to 
40-15. Then aces it, to take it to a tie-break.

5.28am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov 5-6 Nadal*

Ouch! We've just had vision of what's troubling Nadal. The sneaky overhead 
camera has picked up a big cratering blister right in the middle of his racquet 
hand. The doctor was changing some tape on his hand, and that' s a big ugly 
bleeding painful injury. Can see why that would put him off. It doesn't stop 
him winning his next service game to love, absolutely bulldozing Dimitrov there 
with follow-up shots that are just too good.

5.25am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov* 5-5 Nadal

Basically an ace there from Dimitrov, Nadal got a faint outside edge on it. 
Would have needed the snickometer to pick that one up. Nadal needs to attack 
the serve, Dimitrov has him right where he wants him. Booms his way to 40-15, 
then finishes off with another big attack on the net. Easy game win.

5.22am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov 4-5 Nadal*

Oh, Nadal. Caught the line on both sides of the court, dragging Dimitrov one 
way and then the other, then came into the net to finish off his opponent's 
desperate return. Another long rally, then there's a poor attempted backhand 
waft from Dimitrov that he could only check into the net. Nadal goes to 40-0 
with another error, nearly aces him down the middle, then dinks in a 141-kph 
serve that somehow gets him the point, in the end, when a decent rally ends 
with another massive mis-hit, Dimitrov getting more frame than strings in that 
shot and whacking it into the ground.

5.18am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov* 4-4 Nadal

Nadal finally gets a good return to the Dimitrov serve, and the Bulgarian 
smacks it into the net. Next Nadal has Dimitrov scrambling backward to lob a 
weak return in, which allows Nadal to drive wide and there was no chance to 
return that properly. 0-30, but Dimitrov gets one back with a Nadal error. A 
sensational rally follows - they worked each other all over the court, 
baseline, drop shots, to the net, back out to the baselines, then Dimitrov came 
up with a corker of passing shot. Another brilliant rally, and Dimitrov 
triumphs again. That was the best game so far, by a long way.

Dimitrov is changing his serve up beautifully. With Nadal hanging back, he's 
throwing in some slow first serves around 170kph, then lamping some through at 
210 or more.

5.12am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov 3-4 Nadal*

More unforced errors - one from Nadal to lose the first point on serve, then 
he charges the net and Dimitrov plays long. What looked like a brilliant winner 
from Nadal was somehow returned by Dimitrov, then Nadal could only play it into 
the net as he was once again coming into the court. The fourth point he does 
better, working Dimitrov wide enough that the return doesn't make it. 30-30.

Dimitrov tries another drop shot, but it sits up too much, and Nadal is able 
to charge in and slam it down the line. He holds.

5.08am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov* 3-3 Nadal

Now Dimitrov is double-faulting. Then he tries a very poor drop shot that gave 
Nadal every chance to run in and power it back at Dimitrov, who could only net. 
He fights back to 15-30 on serve, then Nadal completely mistimes an attempted 
winner, gets about 13 per cent of it, and dribbles it into the net. Now he 
gives Dimitrov a game point with another netted shot, but Dimitrov does 
likewise to make it all square. Now he plays long to give Nadal a break point...

but saves it with a monstrous shot that Nadal can only bunt long. Plenty of 
errors both way, and Nadal drives wide on the next point to give away the 
advantage. Dimitrov holds serve, he's really attacking Nadal with strong, deep 
shots, and Nadal isn't coping so far.

5.01am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov 2-3 Nadal*

Nadal at least is getting the grunt going. The cameras are lingering on the 
tape on his hands, to speculate whether there's an injury problem. He certainly 
looks unhappy, but maybe that's just because he's losing. Dimitrov gives away 
another point with an error, but Nadal isn't shy of doing the same, and they 
settle at 30-30 on Nadal's serve. Dimitrov's over-hit ball gives Nadal game 
point, but Dimitrov saves it with some beautiful net work - he looked like he 
was stranded, but managed to scramble a return, then hit a second volley that 
spun away from Nadal near the net - no way to reach that. What a shot. Deuce. 

Nadal takes the advantage with two overhead smashes - one returned, the other 
not. Then he advances on the net but blazes wide with options open to take it 
back to Juice. This time he comes to net successfully, opening the court, and 
takes advantage again. He finally gets the game after a 20-something point 
rally, Dimitrov camping on the backhand slice for a while, but Nadal finally 
starting to hit deeper into the court, and eventually Dimitrov plays wide. Big 
effort just to hold serve!

4.53am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov* 2-2 Nadal

Dimitrov has broken back, and now has the chance to get things level again. He 
moves quickly to 30-0, Nadal hitting very shallow returns, then netting one. 
Something is awry here. Dimitrov is taking full advantage, nailing another ace, 
then another, to close out the set to love. Back on level pegging.

4.50am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov 1-2 Nadal*

Another double-fault on the first point from Nadal. Dimitrov floats a 
groundstroke just long to keep things level. Nadal's kicker down the line just 
misses, then he serves long! Three double points in this match already. He 
takes his time, tries to get composure, and serves another fault, then throws 
in a slow second serve and somehow Dimitrov just nets it. Next point Nadal rips 
a nice attempted winner, but gets it just wide. He's given away a break point 
here - and serves wide on the first, then nets on the second! He hasn't hit 
more than one double-fault in a set this Open, until today. Now there's three 
in one game to hand away the break.

4.45am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov* 0-2 Nadal

Getting an interesting infographic on where each player is receiving serve. 
Dimitrov is right up on the baseline, Nadal is hanging way back, which might be 
why he's getting aced so much. Dimitrov mis-hits a return after he thought the 
ball was out, but his challenge fails, and he slips to 15-30 on serve. Nadal 
keeps playing backhand slices, low and slow, to make Dimitrov force the pace, 
and draws the big error into the net. Dimitrov saves one with an ace, but Nadal 
gets a big crosscourt shot in, wrongfoots Dimitrov as he comes back into court, 
then goes the forehand crosscourt again to get past him. Nadal breaks!

Updated at 4.45am GMT

4.40am GMT 

Second set: Dimitrov 0-1 Nadal*

Nadal is cruising early on in this second set - either that or Dimitrov is 
hitting lots of errors, which he is. Nadal wins the game to love, with errors 
deciding every point.

4.35am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov* 6-3 Nadal

Dimitrov misses a serve wide, gets a second-serve let that somehow lobs in, 
then hits the tape again and sees it lob long. Three-part double fault. When he 
gets one in, Nadal really attacks, big forehand after big forehand, setting 
Dimitrov up before the backhand winner. 0-30, before Dimitrov is able to come 
to the net and pick off an easy smash to make it 15-30. Then he produces 
another ace - Nadal challenges in hope more than anything, but it was clearly 
on the line. Then another ace, 217 again, straight down the line - Nadal might 
have got a touch on it, but just barely. Set point, andanother ace - that's 
eight for the set - to win it. Nadal loses his first set of the tournament, 
here in the quarter finals.

4.30am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov 5-3 Nadal*

Nadal draws an error for 15-0, then slaps a shot into the net for 15-15. He's 
shown a few glimpses, but there's still something not right about Nadal so far 
in this set. Perhaps he'll just write it off as a bad job and come back fresh 
in the second. He lands a good crosscourt forehand that Dimitrov can only skew 
into the net, then works Dimitrov back and forth to set up a forehand winner 
down the left-hand line. Finishes the game off with an ace. He's holding serve 
easily enough now - now he'll make Dimitrov try to win the set on serve. 

4.26am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov* 5-2 Nadal

Nadal is standing a long way back to receive serve, so Dimitrov is intent in 
serving as wide as he can on the first, looking to ace Nadal on the angle. He 
lands a couple, and some first serves that Nadal can only mis-hit back. 
Dimitrov also wins to love. No harrying in sight. 

4.24am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov 4-2 Nadal*

Nadal gets a couple of easy points to start his service game, thanks to 
Dimitrov errors, then pounds a 196-kph ace across court. That's two service 
games to love in a row for Nadal, who's starting to look more settled. Will he 
just harry Dimitrov on serve now?

4.20am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov* 4-1 Nadal

Nadal strikes a winner to take the first point, then bunts a return into the 
net, and another shot long. He's looked rusty as a seaside car wreck so far 
today, but then Dimitrov hits long to make it 30-30. Nadal's attempted forehand 
winner down the line gets pushed just wide, both players working each other 
back and forth across the court in that point. Dimitrov losing mojo now, his 
second serve comes out at 134, then he loses the point by playing into the net. 
Deuce.

Long rally to follow. Dimitrov ends it with backhand drop shot that Nadal 
can't chase down, mixing it up with Nadal way behind the baseline. Then he 
slams a winner on the next point that Nadal can only get half a racquet on. 
This is shaping up as some game so far.

4.15am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov 3-1 Nadal*

That was spectacular. Dimitrov tried a big charge shot from Nadal's serve, but 
sent it way up into the air. It took about four minutes to come back down. 
Nadal quickly nails the game down to 40-0 with a serve-volley, charging the 
net, then drives a much better serve that Dimitrov can only send long on the 
return. Rafa wins a game! The kingdom rejoices.

4.11am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov* 3-0 Nadal

Another ace for Dimitrov, followed by a double fault. Nadal gets it to 30-30, 
but again the serve has too much heat for him, and then Dimitrov closes out the 
game by coming to the net, Nadal having to drop so far back that he can only 
hit a desperate attempt at a winner wide. Dimitrov is dominating early, this is 
imposing form. Will need to take full advantage while he has it.

4.08am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov 2-0 Nadal*

What was I saying about good signs? Nadal double-faults on his first service 
point of the game. Dimitrov targets the backhand on the next point to work 
Nadal wide, then smashes a big forehand cross-court winner. Powerful stuff, we 
saw Wawrinka nail some beauties last night. They wrestle to 30-30, then 
Dimitrov comes to the net, Nadal comes to the net, and Dimitrov powers one past 
him to reach an early break point. He gets it when Nadal lobs his return beyond 
the baseline.

4.03am GMT 

First set: Dimitrov* 1-0 Nadal

Dimitrov starts with the serve, and starts with a 217-kph ace. Not too bad. 
Apparently, Bruce McAvaney tells me, his fastest serve at the tournament was 
219, so he's in fine fettle. He moves to 30-0 with a big forehand winner after 
a solid rally, then 40-0 as Nadal can only scoop a sprawling forehand into the 
net from a wide serve. But Nadal wins his first point after pouncing on 
Dimitrov's second serve, after his first fault, and smashes a winning return. 
There's a good sign for Rafa. Dimitrov has plenty of good signs of his own, 
slamming another ace to win the game to 15.

4.00am GMT 

First or second semifinals

This evening, Andy Murray and Roger Federer will play off to play the winner 
of this match: Grigor Dimitrov, or more likely Rafael Nadal. That sets up 
another big chance for a Federer - Nadal semifinal: how many of those have we 
seen over the last few years? (Hint: tell me the answer.) About to get started 
here.

3.58am GMT 

Get ready for tennisball

Ready to party, tennis maniacs? And other over-excited introductions. Here we 
are to start locking in the competitors for the second men's semi-final, now 
that Berdych and Wawrinka have booked their places in the first. Or are they 
playing the second, and is the first undecided? I don't know. Let's be honest, 
you all know much more about tennis than me. I shall simply be reporting the 
events of this match as they happen, for those who are unable to watch it in 
live Technicolour vision. You can provide the analysis - email me at 
geoff.lemon.casual@theguardian.com. 

1.51am GMT 

Geoff will be here shortly, in the meantime here's a quick note on Stan:

The shock of Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> 
losing to Stanislas Wawrinka in the quarter‑finals will ripple through the rest 
of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, 
confirming that past assumptions are crumbling more quickly than anyone 
imagined even a week ago. The old order may not be about to collapse but the 
thunder of approaching cavalry is growing louder.

If Wawrinka, seeded eight, does not win the men's singles title on Sunday, 
perhaps his opponent in the first semi-final on Thursday, the seventh-seeded
Tomas Berdych 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/21/tomas-berdych-beats-david-ferrer-australian-open>
, will. What is certain is that there will be a finalist from outside the big 
four, following on from last year's French Open. David Ferrer, who lost to 
Berdych in the first quarter‑final here, made it to the last match at Roland 
Garros in 2013, only to fold in the presence of Rafael Nadal, whose reign on 
clay is still one of the game's certainties.

So entrenched has the ancien regime become since Nadal arrived to challenge 
the dominance of Roger Federer a decade ago that very few outsiders have been 
able to disturb the seating arrangements at the top table in any of the four 
majors. In the past five years, before Ferrer, Robin Soderling reached the 2009 
and 2010 French Open finals, while Juan Martín del Potro won the US Open in the 
first of those years and Berdych lost the Wimbledon final the following season.

When Andy Murray joined Nadal, Djokovic and Federer at the summit of the game 
with two slams (and an Olympic gold medal), there was still the feeling that 
the next generation were not quite ready and that might yet prove to be the 
case in 2014.

Updated at 3.38am GMT
 