 My garden is racing to the point of no return. By this I mean upward and 
outward in an exponential movement. There is energy aplenty and warmth to keep 
up momentum, but already you can begin to feel the pendulum reaching its 
midpoint in the year as the longest day approaches. The greens take on a new 
density after this point, the lustre of expectation dims a little, and plants 
fill out where they have been moving to take up their positions. I like to know 
that things are in place before this happens, because a garden has a mind of 
its own - a rainstorm when things are at their most voluminous that topples the 
thalictrums, an overzealous geranium that takes the ground of the rudbeckias 
nearby and does me out of a season of autumn flowers. There is nothing worse 
than trying to remedy this once it is too late, and I am out there now planning 
for all eventualities.
Although I try to garden with a low-maintenance hat on, I can never restrict 
myself to the most sensible choice of plants. I like a plant that has a mind of 
its own; I like the unforeseen, the sprawl and the chance happenings that come 
when one thing runs into the next. I am also gardening intensively and cramming 
far too much into one place to be sensible. There are layers to cater for 
seasonal change, early peonies that are consumed by late salvias. But I don't 
want the salvias to swamp the peonies, or for the lilies that come up among 
them to be bowing their heads so low that I lose the flowers in the crowd. The 
secret is finding the balance between sensible and romantic, practical and 
unpredictable. But as with a puppeteer pulling the strings to create a 
semblance of order, it is important that the strings remain unseen.

In the allotment, providing this support system is part of the aesthetic, and 
I'll go out of my way for the pea sticks to look good to keep the peas from 
sprawling into the spinach. We spent a good afternoon out there in May, setting 
up the bamboo canes for the tomatoes and climbing beans. Having your own canes 
is part of the pleasure and why I would always want to have a bamboo patch in 
the garden. This year's supports are made from last year's bamboo thinnings, 
harvested in summer. I prefer tripods or wigwams to the linear supports you see 
in the best veggie gardens. Wigwams have an integral strength because they are 
never vulnerable from any one direction, but a client pointed out that if you 
cross your canes low in a conventional run, you can encourage the beans to hang 
low for easier picking. This year I am trying it out.

In a garden setting, providing support for the sprawlers is something that is 
best kept hidden. The old-fashioned method of twisting hazel bundles together 
so the perennials grow up into them is wonderful if you have time but has its 
disadvantages. Sourcing the bundles in a city is difficult, and you also have 
to get in there early in March before everything starts growing. By now it is 
impossible. I tried getting by for too many years in this garden hoping that I 
wouldn't have to stake, but the aconites always toppled while I was out and 
righted themselves from a slant where they lay. Trying to right them by tying 
them to bamboo canes or setting up a web of strings between canes only inspired 
cursing, and the plants looked like they had been seized by the scruff of the 
neck.

Friends who make their own steel supports invited me down to Kent three years 
ago to use their plywood former to bend a batch of my own. We made three 
heights of two different diameters of U-shaped hoops from reinforcing rod cut 
to length. A small one that stands about knee height once it is pushed into the 
ground, perfect for preventing the Geranium 'Patricia' from swallowing the 
valerian. The middle size is the most useful and stands about 3ft tall and is 
perfect for plants like angelica or persicaria that need redirecting from low 
down. The tallest come to my waist and are useful later for the dahlias once 
they decide they are not going to stand up on their own. The bending day was 
time well spent and now I can stake my perennials in a couple of hours by 
wading into the beds in May and early June and placing them where they are 
needed. In a few days, any that are visible sink into the background and I am 
set up for the summer to do whatever it decides to do. My plants survive deluge 
and the tendency to lean out of shade, which is always a problem because my 
garden is now so full.

Of course there is a host of perennials that don't need support. The grasses, 
for instance, and eupatoriums that can rise to 2 metres without the need for 
something to lean on. Rudbeckias and echinacea rarely need it, but some forms 
of plants that flop have been selected for their uprightness. Echinops 
'Veitch's Blue' and Veronicastrum virginicum 'Lavendelturm' are happy to stand 
stoutly while retaining their grace. You can also initiate a pruning regime in 
late May called the 'Chelsea chop' (too late unless you are 'Up North') and 
this can be applied to late bloomers with a tendency to lean. Some of the 
asters, if they are reduced to half their height in Chelsea week, will 
re-branch along the stem to provide you with a stockier, self-supporting plant. 
This is a secret that is well worth the apparently brutal action. And in terms 
of action, a little foresight now will give you time to sit back and enjoy the 
up-and-coming show.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>

· Observer offer: Create a bamboo patch. Phyllostachys nigra, or black bamboo, 
has a graceful form, dark stems and bright foliage. Buy one plant in a 2-litre 
pot for just £19.95 inc p&p or two plants for just £34.90, saving £5. Call 0870 
836 0909, quoting ref OBDP080, or send a cheque made payable to Observer Reader 
Offers with your order to Observer Black Bamboo Offer, OBDP080, Rookery Farm, 
Joys Bank, Holbeach St Johns, Spalding PE12 8SG. Despatch within 28 days
 