
"I knew about Jack in the 50s but I didn't really know his records. It was 
more that he validated a certain way of life. He was a Jewish kid from Brooklyn 
who joined the rodeo, hung out with Woody Guthrie and lived his dream. He's 
been a sailor, a trucker, he's lived all the lifestyles that folk songs sing 
about.

"Jack sang a high harmony on the demo of Mr Tambourine Man. Bob [Dylan] was 
used to recording in one take and wouldn't go back and fix anything, and Jack 
was a little tipsy that night and was a hair out of tune. Bob decided not to 
use that version and it gave the Byrds a nine-month lead of the song – we got 
it out first, thanks to Ramblin'! It's really a great recording, he's just a 
little out of tune.

"I didn't meet him until 1975 on Dylan's Rolling Thunder Revue 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbFmn54gJeY>. He was the elder statesman – he'd 
go around introducing Bob as his son. He and I hung out quite a lot together, 
and he was responsible for encouraging me to go solo. I discovered he really 
does ramble! I remember him reciting this 15-minute Peter Ustinov monologue 
from memory, doing all the accents. He's an amazing raconteur. He told me, 
'Roger, one of the best times I ever had was when me and my wife went on the 
road; I put my guitar in the Land Rover and barnstormed around the country.' I 
thought it sounded a great way to go on the road: just take your guitar and 
your wife! It was a pivot point, and I've been solo ever since.

"He came and stayed at my house one time. It was a surprise visit, he just 
showed up with his mobile home and parked it outside. He stayed for about two 
weeks, and I have to say we were ready for him to go by the time he left! I 
still see him on and off, we cross paths on the road.I saw him at Pete Seeger's 
90th birthday party at Madison Square Garden, and he's still going strong. His 
last record [A Stranger Here] was great, it's up for a Grammy, and I think he's 
more influential than people give him credit for, for his impact on Dylan in 
particular.

"I love the guy. He's a lot of fun and really down to earth. One thing I can 
say about Jack: it's not an act. He could have been a New York surgeon, but he 
threw all that away for being a cowboy, and for that he's got all my respect."

Key recording: Jack Elliott (Vanguard, 1964)
 