
You don't need to tell twenty-seven year-old Sentwali Anaclet about the power 
of the media in Rwanda. Fifteen years ago he and his classmates huddled around 
a battered radio in a township near Kigali. Amongst other names, members of 
Sentwali's family were read out. Bad radio reception didn't stop broadcasted 
racism from spreading like wildfire. Like many genocide survivors, he is now 
the only member of his family left.

The abuse of radio broadcasting in the 1994 genocide has left a bitter taste 
in the mouth of Rwandan journalism. One and a half decades down the line, 
questions of security versus free speech continue to stifle media development. 
As the government made clear when it banned the BBC radio service earlier this 
year on the grounds of 'irresponsible journalism', talking about ethnicity 
remains strictly illegal. Foreign journalists need government permission to 
work in the country and many are not invited back for a second visit. Headlines 
stop at weather forecasts and grain prices.

"It needs time. You don't forget that quickly. People find it hard to trust an 
industry that – even euphemistically – told neighbours to kill neighbours" 
explains Sentwali.

Last year after finishing his journalism degree in California, he returned to 
Rwanda to work with a project run by the organization Rwanda Initiative that 
trains local journalists in Kigali. He has taken his lunch break out of a busy 
schedule to talk to me and promises me ten minutes. Half an hour later we are 
still talking.

"It's not just about money. We do never have enough equipment in the 
classroom, but there is enough enthusiasm amongst the students to grasp the 
importance of a stable media – this is the most important ingredient for 
change."

Where there is a Rwandan will, there is a Rwandan way. With time, the media is 
re-inventing and reconciling itself. There are now at least seven radio 
channels; two broadcasted in English, three in French and the rest in local 
languages. One project run by Radio la Benevolencija, a Dutch multimedia NGO, 
aims to broaden dialogue through grass-roots journalism. Soap opera and radio 
dramas are popular forms of 'softer' media that offer an open platform for 
issues such as ethnicity to be discussed publicly.

Beyond Rwandan soap operas, there are wider cracks in international media 
relations that need to be bridged. One repeated criticism of the western media 
reporting on the events in Rwanda in April 1994 is that it was all just too 
little, too late.

"Rwanda in April 1994 is a good example of where teams of journalists were 
needed working on both sides...Even reporting now, I don't know the terrain. I 
don't speak the language. I haven't been through a genocide," says Amy Brown, 
an American film producer recording the development of the media in post-1994 
Rwanda.

Communication is key.

"Rwandans are very aware of how Africans are portrayed in the western media. 
When I was filming, there was a real reluctance to take part. There is the idea 
that images will get misused. As a journalist you really need to explain your 
incentives and to know how to do that, you need to know the people."

There is however, a larger hurdle that restricts western reporting in Rwanda. 
Amid a global economic crisis, non-profit journalism in western countries is 
itself a victim of widespread media cutbacks. Money doesn't just make the world 
go around, it also gets the word out.

The Belgium-based Pascal Decroos Fund for Investigative Journalism is one 
government-funded project that since its launch in 2000 has aimed to bring 
development back into western headlines.

"The problem is that topics are too complex, take too long and are too far 
away – journalists aren't getting this kind of funding from editors in 
mainstream media anymore. That is when they come to us," explains the executive 
director, Ides Debruyne.

Yet a reliance on government funding does not offer a long-term solution to 
the financial deficits in development-orientated journalism, he adds.
"It is time to think of a new business model. In the future it will be 
difficult to have in depth journalism inside developing countries without the 
help of outside companies."

Speaking to Sentwali with over 600.000 miles and a bad skype connection 
between us, I had opened a can of worms. Having started out with the conviction 
that more liberalisation and further media outlets would be a solution, I was 
starting to doubt whether such a one-size-fits-all-approach could suit Rwanda.

The hardest question, I had saved until last; how can you be sure of the real 
incentives behind NGO funding for media outlets? A half sigh, half chuckle 
summed up his response.

"That's the same question asked about all aid coming into Africa – and there 
is no short answer…better none at all?"

We live worlds apart in a global community. The media is a vehicle that can 
either bridge or widen these gaps. The 1994 Rwandan genocide and the inadequate 
western response was a brutal wake up call to this. Complex development issues 
do not fit into quirky anecdotes or headlines. With media liberalisation 
becoming more widespread, and the number of additional outlets increasing, it 
will be up to journalists to hold their industry accountable. Informed and 
qualitative journalism has a role in getting suppressed voices heard.

It's time to talk development.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 