
Barcelona has been a fashionable and intensely fashion-conscious city for many 
years now. In 1966, when I first went there, it was rather different. 
Non-Catalans thought it was provincial, like the rest of Spain. Nobody outside 
Catalonia, and by no means everyone inside it, would have agreed with the 
argument of Barcelona and Modernity: Gaudí to Dali, the new show opening at the 
Met in New York next month, which is essentially that, between 1870 and 1920, 
Barcelona was intermittently a great cultural centre, to be reckoned as one of 
the essential proving grounds of modernism.

So many Americans, and even some Europeans, were used to thinking that 
modernism had two capitals: Paris and New York. You could hardly even call this 
view simplified. It was blind. It left out Vienna. It ignored London. It 
downplayed Berlin. And as for Barcelona, what did I know about it, in my 
semi-virginal ignorance during the mid-1960s? That three decades before, in the 
name of the doomed Spanish republic, it had stubbornly resisted General Franco 
and paid a heavy, bitter price for it. That George Orwell had written a book 
about it called Homage to Catalonia; that in it he had been spectacularly wrong 
in dissing the admittedly very weird architectAntoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi>, claimed by the French 
surrealists, who had designed that enormous penitential church apparently made 
of melted candle-wax and chicken-guts, the Sagrada Familia. That was about it. 
Forty years ago, the foreigner's knowledge of Barcelona was so embarrassingly 
slight that we weren't even embarrassed by it.

The 1,500 years of the city's existence had produced only five names that came 
readily to mind. There was Gaudí, and the century's greatest cellist, Pablo 
Casals. There were the painters Salvador Dali, Joan Miro and Pablo Picasso, 
who, although he was born in Malaga and spent most of his long life in France, 
had become a sort of honorary Catalan because he studied at the art school in 
Barcelona. But even the appreciation of Dali and Miro was considerably 
distorted because those who loved them didn't appreciate their Catalan roots. 
Miro, for instance, was a country boy to whose imagery the folk culture of 
Catalonia, with its obsessive concentration on shit as a rural sacrament, was 
absolutely basic; such meanings were not at all obvious when seen from Paris or 
New York.

Of other Catalan artists who were older than Picasso, and were at the time 
rather his superiors, such as that superbly fluent and piercing draughtsman 
Ramon Casas, we were quite ignorant. We got Gaudí wrong because we knew little 
or nothing about his deeply Catalan roots, his obsession with craft culture and 
his deep, Catholic piety. We took him for a proto- surrealist weirdo, which 
trivialises his achievement. We had no idea where to put him, although he was 
so manifestly radical an artist, because we were too blinded by the rhetoric of 
the 1960s to imagine a radicalism that was both right-wing and intensely 
fruitful.

On the other hand, we probably wouldn't have recognised the name of an almost 
equally great architect of the late 19th century, Lluis Domenech i Montaner, or 
even been able to pronounce that of Josep Puig i Cadafalch, one of the most 
erudite and sophisticated designers ever to work in Europe. Of course, none of 
these ever built anything for a non-Catalan patron.

We knew little or nothing about the magnificent murals by Romanesque artists 
salvaged from the collapsing churches of the Pyrenees and transferred to the 
National Museum of Catalan Art - which are to fresco painting what the images 
of Ravenna are to the art of mosaic.

Barcelona hadn't produced significant painting when the siglo d'oro, the 
"golden century" of Velazquez and Ribera, was at its height. Its turn would 
begin to come at the end of the 1800s with what Catalans called their 
Renaixenca - not "renaissance" in the Italian sense, but certainly a rebirth of 
energy, in which Catalan painters like Casas and Santiago Rusinol hooked into 
the energies of fin-de-siecle Paris (a train journey away to the north) and 
came up with their own realist movement: laconic, gritty and often infused with 
political reportage. Its centres were two: a Parisian boite called the Moulin 
de la Galette, and a bohemian bar- restaurant in Barcelona named Els Quatre 
Gats (the Four Cats). Revolt, and the smell of dynamite, was in the Catalan air 
as in the Parisian; indeed, through the 1890s, Barcelona was the capital of 
world anarchism, and the sporadic roar of explosions ratcheted up the anxieties 
of its middle classes then as the thought of Islamist terrorism does now. An 
outstanding painting by Casas was Garrote Vil, 1894, showing the execution of a 
young star of the anarchist movement, Santiago Salvador, whose bomb had 
slaughtered several dozen opera-goers during a performance of Rossini's William 
Tell. An artist of marvellous facility, Casas moved with ease between the lower 
and upper crusts of Barcelona, becoming the city's chief social recorder. His 
self-portrait, pedalling a tandem bicycle with his friend Pere (Peter) Romeu, 
the lugubrious, rabbit-toothed manager of the Four Cats, is one of the 
indelible emblems of the period.

A good deal of expert, witty and sometimes moving work came out of the Catalan 
Renaixenca, though it certainly produced no painter as great as Adolf von 
Menzel in Germany, Isaac Levitan in Russia or Frederic Church in the United 
States. But it did create an extraordinary city plan, the Eixample, or 
"enlargement", of Barcelona into the grid of equal squares that surrounds the 
medieval city. The Eixample was the ancestor of all grid cities to come after 
the 1860s, including Manhattan. Its visionary designer was Ildefons Cerda. 
Trained as a civil engineer in Madrid, he had written a treatise on the 
appalling housing conditions of the old city, which he was determined to 
change. While the bards of 19th-century Catalonia - obsessed by the desire to 
revive their lost cultural independence - were warbling nostalgically about the 
need to bring back the glories of the Catalan middle ages, it was clear that in 
terms of hygiene and social services, the ordinary working folk of Barcelona 
inside the muralles - the corset of walls in which the Bourbons had imprisoned 
the rebellious, working-class ciutat vella, or old core of 
medieval-to-18th-century Barcelona - had never escaped them. And because of the 
explosive industrial growth of their city, conditions were getting worse all 
the time.

Cerda would change this. He envisioned his new city, built on the sloping 
plain outside the muralles, as a perfect fabric of identically sized blocks, 
covering nine square kilometres with their regimented grid. It was therefore 
quite different to Baron Haussmann's plans for Paris. Haussmann needed to 
demolish an ancient city. Cerda had nothing to demolish. He had the urbanist's 
dream, a blank slate. Cerda thought of each of his blocks as a social 
cross-section: there would be no "good" and no "bad" end of town, and the 
cellular plan could be expanded forever. Only a third of each block, about 
5,000 square metres, would be built on; the rest would be patio and green 
space. Cerda's standard block would have 700,000 square feet of built floor 
space and a maximum height of 65 feet. Over the next century such restrictions 
went by the board, particularly during the Franco era. Developers and corrupt 
officials made a travesty of Cerda's plan.

Nevertheless, the new city, from the 1870s on, became a treasury of new 
architecture, which fused two seemingly incompatible desires: to be modern, and 
to recapitulate the glories of the Catalan past. Painting had not done this.

But building would.

Llu is Domenech i Montaner, born 1849, died 1923, was the great theorist and 
the practical all-rounder of Catalan architectural nationalism. He was widely 
travelled, deeply read, and a scholar of everything from iron forging to 
medieval heraldry. This protean figure was the son of a Barcelona bookbinder. 
He was politically more conservative than William Morris in England, but a 
somewhat analogous figure and just as delightful a personality.

Domenech was absorbed by the problem of defining a national architecture, a 
necessary thing for Catalans if they were to assert their difference from the 
rest of Spain. All talk about design and building, he declared in a manifesto 
published in 1878, has to centre on this. In writing, we can say who we are and 
what we aspire to be. We can imagine painting making similar declarations. But 
can architecture do it? And if so, how?

We modern Europeans, he argued, live in a culture which is alive but also a 
museum. Through it we get access to a huge variety of prototypes and ideas - 
Greek, Gothic, Vitruvian, Indian, Egyptian and Islamic building forms, and we 
ought to be proficient in all of them. But none of them constitutes our central 
myth, technology itself. In a world of iron and glass, of chemistry and 
electricity, Domenech wrote, "everything heralds the appearance of a new era 
for architecture". Spain, he went on, has two great wells of architecture. One 
is the Romanesque and Gothic in Catalonia. The other, in the south, owing its 
existence to the Arabs, is Islamic: Granada, Seville, Cordoba. Neither excludes 
the other and local patriotism must not make it seem to. A truly national 
architecture has to draw strength from both, but it will not do so just by 
copying.

A wonderful example of what he meant was in fact one of his earliest 
buildings, designed for the 1888 Universal Exposition: the cafe-restaurant, now 
converted into a zoological museum. It looks medieval, with its crenellations 
and white ceramic shields, but these are actually an early form of pop art, 
advertising Catalan produce and even the drinks the cafe was offering its 
customers. And the building itself is made of plain brick and industrial iron. 
The stretch between its medievalism and the modernity of its materials makes it 
an early modernist landmark. To use plain brick in a festive urban building in 
1888 was close to a breach of etiquette. The very word for brick in Catalan, 
totxo, also meant "ugly" or "stupid". But Domenech thought brick ought to be 
used plainly. To him, as to Gaudí and to their younger colleague Puig i 
Cadafalch, it was clar i catala, "clear and Catalan". The same with iron, about 
whose unembellished use young Domenech was just as explicit. He let his iron 
framing show. He also used painted, glazed and moulded ornament, but never to 
obscure the structure underneath. This reached an extreme in the ceramic 
flowers on the structural grid of his masterpiece of the early 1900s, the Palau 
de la Musica Catalana, or "Palace of Catalan Music".

This amazing building had been designed to house a choral society, formed to 
revive and glorify Catalan folk music - canco popular. This in turn would serve 
as a bridge to classical music, musica universal - Bach, Beethoven, Handel, 
Berlioz, Mahler and especially (the favourite musical obsession of educated 
Catalans) Wagner, who was regarded as an honorary Catalan - "an instrument and 
a sign of national culture", as one Catalan put it. They saw in his work for 
Germany an achieved parallel to their own desire to create a myth of national 
identity for Catalonia. His holy mountains, like Montsalvat, Parsifal's 
birthplace, were their holy mountains.

Moreover, the age of Wagner's themes contrasted with the daring newness of his 
forms. Wagner had meant the Ring cycle to be the founding epic of Bavaria. Its 
mission was to describe the identity of the German race. Likewise, the 
Renaixenca was obsessed by the supposed uniqueness of the Catalan people. It 
sought its modernism in an idealised, mythic past. No wonder Catalanists 
adopted Wagner as a guide to combining myths of a legendary past with the 
overarching myth of progress and innovation. Wagner's vision of the "total work 
of art", in which all media played a part, had a strong allure for architects 
who were working out of a deep craft base to combine the talents of painters, 
ceramists, metalsmiths, joiners, mosaicists and glaziers. All these are present 
at an abnormally rich level of display in the Palau de la Musica, the most 
Wagnerian building in Barcelona - or the world. It is an ultimate showcase 
building, its vaults sheathed in pale ochre and aquamarine embossed tiles, its 
surfaces brilliant with roses the size of cabbages, its staircases shining with 
squat golden-glass balusters. But not even these prepare you for the 
auditorium, a large box of pink stained glass. From the middle of its ceiling a 
huge, spectacular skylight, or claraboia, swells down, an inverted bell or 
pendulous breast. Its motif is a circle of angelic choristers, diffusing a soft 
pink-and-blue radiance from on high.

In his architecture Domenech quoted incessantly, but he did so with great 
intelligence and verve. So did other Catalan architects, his contemporaries, 
like Puig i Cadafalch, who fell under the inspiration of Dutch townhousing and, 
for a chocolate millionaire named Amatller, built on Passeig de Gracia a 
fantastically rich variant on one of those stepped facades that gaze down on 
the canals of Amsterdam. Its tiles, blue, cream, pink and oxblood, shine and 
twinkle in the Spanish sun in a way that no Dutch burgher would have tolerated. 
And its chromatic richness shines out against the uniformity of the Eixample 's 
grid in a way that Ildefons Cerda would not have liked either. Puig hated the 
uniformity of the Eixample, and was not the only architect who did his best to 
disrupt it.

And though no museum can borrow whole buildings, what will be shown at the Met 
is the utterly delectable character of high-bourgeois social surface: the 
curling inlaid furniture of brilliant cabinet-makers like Gaspar Homar, the 
delicate jewellery of Lluis Masriera, the fabrics, ceramics and bronzes that 
gave such iridescent texture to things of domestic use. Though Barcelona's 
later devotion to a more strict, International-style modernism is also set 
before you in lavish detail in this show, and there is a brilliant, furious 
sampling of republican propaganda connected to the civil war, it's inevitable 
that the belle-epoque material seems the most fascinating and idiosyncratic.

Some things were designed by the most famous architect - and for most people, 
especially foreign visitors, the single most famous human being - that 
Barcelona ever produced, who was killed by a tram one June day in 1926. Only 
later, as he lay dying in the public hospital of Sant Creu, was he identified 
as the 74-year-old Antoni Gaudí, architect of the unfinished temple of the 
Sagrada Familia and a dozen other smaller (but, many believe, better) buildings 
in and just outside his city.

The Sagrada Familia, or (to give its full name) the Expiatory Temple of the 
Holy Family, is beyond rival the best-known structure in Catalonia. It is to 
Barcelona what the Eiffel Tower is to Paris or the Harbour Bridge to Sydney: a 
completely irreplaceable logo. Being unfinished, it is also much misunderstood, 
starting with the fact that so many of the millions of tourists who visit it 
every year imagine that it is a "cathedral". But Barcelona had already had a 
perfectly fine cathedral since feudal times. The Sagrada Familia was intended 
to be what its name says: a temple, where Catalans (and, Gaudí hoped, 
eventually the whole Catholic world) would converge to do penance for the sins 
of "modernity".

In the last quarter of the 19th century, the Catholic church felt it was under 
siege from all those forces of atheism, scientism, disobedience and doubt that 
its hierarchy rolled together into the portmanteau word "modernism". Huge 
rearguard actions were fought by Rome. There was Pope Pius IX's "Syllabus of 
Errors", launched against the threat of liberalism and listing just about every 
conceivable advanced or critical idea about sin, belief and duty as a loathsome 
heresy, to be punished in hellfire. Extreme dogmas were promulgated, such as 
that of papal infallibility. It is probably true to say that, in the late-19th 
century, the Catholic church became more ferocious in its perception of 
heretical threat than it had been since the time of Luther. And Gaudí, to whom 
a penitential relationship with an implacable God was the very core of 
religious belief, was just the architect to convey this in stone.

What the church wanted was a new counter-reformation, based on an extreme 
ratcheting-up of cultic devotion to Jesus, Mary and the saints. Gaudí conceived 
his temple as a means to that end. It would be an ecstatically repressive 
building that would help atone for the "excesses" of democracy. "Everyone has 
to suffer," he once told a disciple. "The only ones who don't suffer are the 
dead. He who wants an end to suffering wants to die."

Gaudí was born in 1852 in Reus, a fair-sized provincial town in the lower 
plains of Tarragona. He came from an artisan family of metalsmiths. The country 
round Tarragona is archetypally Mediterranean, hard stony country where almond 
trees and olives flourish in the unforgiving soil. Growing up there, Gaudí 
developed a passionate curiosity about its plants, animals and geology. Nature, 
he said later, was "The Great Book, always open, that we should force ourselves 
to read". Everything structural or ornamental that an architect might imagine 
was already prefigured in natural form, in limestone grottoes or dry bones, in 
a beetle's shining wing case or the thrust of an ancient olive trunk.

He never ceased to draw on nature. Each paving-block of Passeig de Gracia 
features a starfish and an octopus, originally designed for the Casa Batllo. 
Turtles and tortoises support the columns of the Nativity facade of the Sagrada 
Familia, which also has 30 different species of stone plant copied from the 
vege- tation of Catalunya and the Holy Land. Mushrooms become domes, or columns 
of the Casa Calvet. Gaudí was particularly fond of mushrooms. Most Catalans 
are, yet Gaudí not only perceived in them a possible origin of the column and 
capital, but also used a fong, a poisonous amanita mushroom, for one of the 
ceramic entrance domes of the Parc Güell. The columns of his masterpiece the 
Güell Crypt are a grove of brick trunks, sending out branches - the ribbed 
vaults - that lace into one another.

Gaudí never forgot country buildings in stone, clay and timber - materials, he 
said (with a sovereign disregard for the working hours of common folk) "which 
can be gathered by the peasants themselves in their spare time between their 
labours." Thus the rough stone walls of terraces in the Baix Camp became the 
"rustic" colonnades of the Parc Güell. In the latter years of his life, when 
making the figures for the Nativity facade of the Sagrada Familia, he made 
literal transcriptions from nature, by chloroforming birds and even a donkey in 
order to cast them in plaster. Sometimes this effigy-making was of a rather 
gruesome kind; in order to make infants for his scene of the Slaughter of the 
Innocents, he got permission from the Hospital of the Holy Cross on the Ramblas 
to cast the corpses of stillborn babies in plaster; live ones could not be used 
since they could not be prevented from moving. There exists an old photo of the 
inside of one of Gaudí's studios, looking like a charnel-house, with plaster 
bodies and limbs hanging on every wall. But what mattered most to him were the 
forms and structural principles that could be deduced from inanimate matter, 
plants and rock-forms especially.

His artisan ancestry mattered immensely to Gaudí. He thought of himself as a 
man of his hands, not a theoretician. He said he learned about complex 
membranes by watching his father beat iron and copper sheets, making up the 
forms as he went along without drawing them first. Unlike his colleagues Puig i 
Cadafalch and Domenech i Montaner, he thought in terms of manual, not 
conceptual space. His mature work can't be imagined at all from flat drawings. 
Its surfaces twist and wiggle. The space flares, solemnly inflates, then 
collapses again. He did not like to draw - it didn't give enough information 
about the complex spaces he carried in his head - and he only used drawing as a 
last resort. Instead, he made models, from wood, clay or turnips.

Because abstractions bored him, and he did not think naturally in terms of 
T-square architecture (orthographic projection: plan, elevations, sections), he 
was not highly esteemed as a student and seems not to have won exceptional 
grades - not the first time by any means that a genius has not seemed to be one 
when at school. Also, the teachers at the school were much more interested in 
transmitting the principles of Graeco-Roman planning and ornament to their 
pupils than in teaching what most interested Gaudí - rural vernacular building 
and Catalan medievalism. The lessons of both, he came to believe, fused in a 
unique sensibility that was nationalist at root, that could only be fully 
pursued in Catalonia - neither pinched like the Protestant north nor laxly 
sensuous like the deep Arabic south. "Our strength and superiority lies in the 
balance of feeling and logic," he wrote, "whereas the Nordic races become 
obsessive and smother feeling. And those of the south, blinded by the excess of 
colour, abandon reason and produce monsters."

One medieval complex in particular fired Gaudí's imagination as a teenager. It 
was the monastery of Santa Maria de Poblet, some way inland from Barcelona, not 
far from Reus. This once mighty Cistercian foundation had begun in the mid-12th 
century. Its historical and patriotic import was immense, since from the time 
of his death all the kings of Aragon and Catalonia had been buried there. It 
was therefore the national pantheon. As architecture, it was the grandest 
Cistercian building in Catalonia, strong, severe and plain. But when Gaudí was 
a boy, Poblet was a ruin and he conceived the mad, devout idea of restoring it 
to at least a memory of its former glories. To him it was the arch-symbol of 
Catholic supremacy and Catalan identity - and the liberals had ruined it in the 
name of "freedom" and "rights".

Thus in Gaudí's mind, religious conservatism - the more extreme, the nobler - 
fused with the retention of Catalan identity. Hence his obsession with making 
amends to God. Very luckily for him, he found a patron for his work. He was the 
magnate Eusebi Güell, fanatical Catholic and quintessential grandee of the 
Catalan establishment. Practically all Gaudí's first projects were for Güell: 
the fierce iron dragon gate of his finca [estate], and the weirdly lugubrious 
Güell Palace off the Ramblas, which has the most beautiful roof in Spain - an 
acropolis of 20 or more chimneys and ventilators, each sheathed in trencadis or 
irregular mosaics of broken tile and glass.

He was fascinated by how the mosaic fragmentation of the trencadis played 
against the solidity of architectural form, dissolving its stability. Later, 
his brilliant but lesser-known colleague Josep Maria Jujol would design the 
trencadi patterns for the walls and serpentine seats in the park of a large 
(but financially unsuccessful) housing project Güell began on Mont Pelat, 
overlooking the city, which became the Parc Güell.

Güell, as an enlightened capitalist, wanted to reduce friction between workers 
and management - Barcelona was a city of frequent riots and strikes. He decide 
d to create an industrial village, or colonia, south of Barcelona. It would 
have every amenity, including a church, which would naturally be de- signed by 
Gaudí. He started thinking about the design in 1898. The first stones were laid 
in 1908. Eusebi Güell died in 1918. By then, the crypt was almost finished, but 
there was not much above ground. What we have now is only a fragment of a 
dream. And yet its logic of construction, its sheer blazing inventiveness, 
removes it from the domain of fantasy and creates one of the world's most 
sublime architectural spaces.

How did Gaudí do it? Upside down, with string and little bags of birdshot: the 
infinitely laborious ancestor of computer modelling. Gaudí draws out the plan 
of the crypt, and marks where each column would meet the floor. He hangs a 
string from each point, and connects the hanging strings with cross-strings to 
simulate beams, arches and vaults, attaching to each string a tiny bag of lead 
pellets, care- fully scaled at so many milligrams per pellet. The result is a 
web of forces. All the forces in the web would be tensile, since string has 
zero resistance to bending. Now he photographs the model 72 times, with a 
five-degree change of rotation each time. And he turns the photos upside down. 
Tension becomes compression. All the angles of lean in the crypt are plotted. 
And because there will be no tensile bending stress anywhere in the structure, 
it can be built of stone, brick and tile by traditional masons - in a 
technology that hasn't changed since the 14th century.

· Barcelona and Modernity: Gaudí to Dali is at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York, from March 7 to June 3
 