
Forgive me for banging the same drum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/19/reading-group-saint-exupery?commentpage=all#start-of-comments>
, but I want to say again that Wind, Sand And Stars is one of the most 
wonderful books we have so far encountered on the Reading Group: a masterpiece, 
a delight and a work of strange and profound beauty.

But it is not faultless. It's too human for that. Love the book as I do (and 
by extension its author), I must also admit that it presents a few problems. 
Among these – and perhaps most troubling for 21st-century Readers – are those 
summed up in a question byreading group contributor Richardpierce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19038237>:

"Do the occasional undertones of sexism and racism weaken the book at all?"

Not an easy question to answer. Before attempting, let's address the 
accusation.

Billy Mills wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19040211>:
 In the early chapters I found myself pondering the absolutely unproblematic 
relationship with French imperialism. Flying the post down to Dakar was, in 
effect, doing the work of the imperial administration. 
Saint-Exupéry is clearly happy to be working for a colonial power, and doesn't 
much question how welcome his presence may be in the countries he describes so 
lovingly. He at least makes a few references to "rebels" throughout the book 
and people who are presumably battling colonial rule in Morocco and the Sahara. 
He describes them sympathetically, and even with respect, but no mention is 
made of the rightness or wrongness of their cause – aside from the possible 
implications in the use of words like rebel and barbarian ("dissidents", 
"barbares" in French).

It's possible to defend Saint-Exupéry on the grounds that colonialism is not 
his subject and any commentary would be out of place in Wind, Sand And Stars. 
What's more he's enough of a writer to show that the system causes problems, 
even if he chooses not to explore them. But, as Billy Mills also pointed out, 
he says a few things about the locals that sound offensive to 21st-century 
ears. He pities a man whose cousin is "a negress", he talks of educating the 
"arrogance" out of tribespeople. I winced plenty of times, even if I also 
admired him for at least trying to see the humanity of the people he describes. 
This is a man, after all, who paid to free a black slave because he saw him 
having as much right to a family life, autonomy and dignity as anyone else. 
Nothing, thankfully, is simply black and white in Wind, Sand and Stars.

As for sexism, BillyMills wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19042200>:
 The almost complete absence of women in a book that is essentially about 
human self-realisation is unfortunate, shall we say. 
Even the French title is Terre des hommes. I wouldn't dare hazard a definitive 
translation for that ambiguous phrase – but one literal rendition would be 
"land of men". Yet as well as highlighting a potential issue, that androcentric 
title also gives an indication of the problem of judging a 1939 book by 2012 
morality. I'm sure you'll correct me if I'm wrong, but my assumption is that 
"men" was used as a general term for all humanity just as much in French as it 
was in English – before we all started getting so squeamish about doing so. He 
might write "man" but he means everyone.

What's more (and here regular readers should brace themselves) although I was 
at first inclined to agree with Billy Mills, I'm not sure that he's entirely 
right. The first defence that sprang to my mind was to ask why we should expect 
Saint-Exupéry to talk much about women when he knew only men who flew the 
planes. But then I flicked through the book again and realised that women are 
in it. They are always, for instance, in the airmen's thoughts. It is regard 
for his wife that keeps Guillaumet going on his remarkable walk to safety in 
the snow of the Andes. Saint-Exupéry too tells us about his wife and in terms 
of utmost respect.

Elsewhere, perhaps it's telling that the author devotes a long section to his 
old female housekeeper whose entire world didn't extend beyond the "park" at 
his family home. But she is just as able to put his globetrotting adventures 
into perspective as he is to mock her limit her limited horizons: "Yes, yes," 
she says. "Boys race about and break their bones and think they're big and 
strong." Then there are two girls at the house in Argentina who tell him a 
story about vipers under the floorboards, those "knowing judges" he admires so 
much. When he imagines them marrying, it is they who marry "fools" not the 
other way around. The women are the ones Saint-Exupéry respects not the 
husbands who "take them away into slavery." This is not the writing of a 
misogynist.

Perhaps we should, in fact, be surprised at how advanced the author was in his 
thinking. A man who recognised a black slave's right to autonomy and respect 
during the days of Jim Crow, and who bewailed the life of drudgery in store for 
most women long before feminism took hold.

Or perhaps this whole discussion is, as everythingsperfect says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19041411>, misguided:
 I wonder whether talking about implicit racism and sexism might be a 
cul-de-sac. Obviously he is of his time, obviously there are points that may 
strike us now that would be invisible to a contemporary reader. But to me the 
interesting thing about the book are the universals – the belief in the human 
potential. I think that in this day and age where we are treated as consumers 
and almost brainwashed into thinking about ourself as consumers (politicians 
telling us that we have a duty to spend money to 'keep the economy going' makes 
me feel like a hamster on a wheel) ... to listen to a voice like 
Saint-Exupéry's is to be reminded of the miracle of human existence. 
Nilpferd also added 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19043008>:
 I'd agree with this, the book does occasionally flirt with controversy, but 
possibly it is a lost opportunity if we focus on things the book doesn't 
address, or things which are tangential to its strengths. Not wanting to seem 
like an apologist for anything people might feel offended by in the text, of 
course. There is the odd passage I also have ambiguous feelings about. 
We're onto the age-old question of whether it's right to judge an older text 
by contemporary standards. We might not share the same sensibilities as 
Saint-Exupéry, but who are we to say he is wrong? And even if we do make the 
perilous assumption that we modern readers do occupy some kind of moral high 
ground, would it really be better if Saint-Exupéry had the same worldview as 
the average Guardian reader? Should we really be mentally bowdlerizing 
everything we read? Isn't part of the book's fascination that it is so much a 
part of its time – as well as something that will hopefully communicate to the 
souls of generations to come? And can you imagine how well the book would have 
gone down with his contemporaries if he had interrupted that wonderful flowing 
prose every so often to give a little homily about the dangers of sexism and 
horrors of colonialism?

Nilpferd also flipped the issue of judging a man from the first half of the 
20th century by our own value system, by asking if we are still able to produce 
people as impressive as him today:
 I like the idea of considering where today's St-Ex. might be; has technology 
simply removed the need or opportunity for such pioneers, or is it a case of 
needing to looking in entirely different places for comparable contemporary 
insight? 
We might also ask what Saint-Exupéry would make of us. At this point, I'm very 
conscious that I'm writing this in a cosy little attic in Norwich and once I've 
finished I'll have a cosy little supper, sit in front of a cosy little fire and 
go to bed. It's far easier to criticise someone who has been dead for 
half-a-century than it is to climb into an unreliable plane and set out over a 
vast, empty desert …
 