
Normally, at this stage in the Reading group, I'd be digging in to the themes 
and ideas of our subject book. But this time I want to do it differently. I 
want to start by begging you to read Wind, Sand and Stars. And if you've 
already read it go out there and tell everyone you know to read it. And tell 
them to tell everyone they know …

I say this not because I'm desperate for page hits (not just because, anyway!) 
but because this book is such a jewel. A week ago I'd never heard of it. Now I 
can barely imagine how I managed without it – and bitterly regret all that lost 
time when I could have been pressing the book into people's hands, making them 
read its astonishing foreword and watching as they too are flooded with magic 
and wonder.

On the subject of that foreword probably the best thing I can do to make you 
understand its power is to set it down here – and I'm going to type it by hand, 
just for the fun of it:

The earth teaches us more about ourselves than all the books in the world, 
because it is resistant to us. Self-discovery comes when man measures himself 
against an obstacle. To attain it, he needs an implement. He needs a 
carpenter's plane, or a plough. Little by little, as he walks behind the 
plough, the farmer forces out a few of nature's secrets, and the truth which he 
uncovers is universal. In the same way the aeroplane, the implement of the 
airline companies, brings man face to face with the old problems.


In my mind's eye, I still have the image of my first night flight in 
Argentina. It was a dark night, with only occasional scattered lights 
glittering like stars on the plain.

Each one, in that ocean of shadows, was a sign of the miracle of 
consciousness. In one home people were reading, or thinking, or sharing 
confidences. In another, perhaps, they were searching through space, wearying 
themselves with the mathematics of the Andromeda nebula. In another they were 
making love. These small flames shone far apart in the landscape, demanding 
their fuel. Even the most unassuming of them, the flame of the poet, the 
teacher or the carpenter. But among these living stars, how many closed 
windows, how many extinct stars, how many sleeping men …

We must surely seek unity. We must surely seek to communicate with some of 
those fires burning far apart in the landscape.

How's that? And that's just a translation (The Penguin translator William Rees 
<http://www.dominiquesvillas.co.uk/en/News_and_Features/books/Fallen_idol.cfm> 
must take considerable credit. It is wonderful sentence-by-sentence and 
chapter-by-chapter. His introduction is also marvellous.)

The book continues in such heady fashion from there. Or at least, I'm assuming 
it does. I'm actually only two thirds of the way through as I write this. Even 
though it clocks in at just 120 pages, Wind, Sand and Stars is taking me far 
longer to read than most novels. It's so intoxicating that I keep having to put 
it down every 10 minutes to stop my head spinning. It is beautiful. It tells 
(thrillingly!) of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's experiences as a pilot in the 
1920s, helping to develop postal routes across the Sahara and the Andes, and in 
doing so open up the world. And it does so in in rich, vivid prose full of 
startling images ("The wind made great palm leaves that scudded over the 
surface of the puddles"), and poetic meditations on the nature of comradeship, 
mortality, and simple joy. There are wonderful descriptions of landscapes seen 
from the air, of the many strange places where Saint-Exupéry crash-landed, of 
setting out in the early morning with a bus full of office clerks and 
bureaucrats knowing his own day was to be spent in an elemental battle with the 
clouds and sky …

But good as all that is, perhaps the most exhilarating thing about this book 
is its heady evocation of what it means to be a pioneer. Saint-Exupéry writes 
evocatively about the excitement of flight, and danger and testing his mettle 
in a small craft — always at the mercy of the elements and prone to mechanical 
failure. He was clearly a thrill seeker. But in the best sense of the word. He 
wasn't like those pointlessly messing up the pristine snows of Everest today, 
or dangling from ropes over tourist-larded canyons. He had true purpose. He was 
charting a course that he knew would change the world forever. After him, 
everything would be smaller, faster, closer. He writes in the full 
consciousness of that alteration and to read it is to read of one of the most 
astonishing developments in human history. This book is of deep significance to 
anyone who has benefited from air travel – and that's everyone. OK, planes also 
deliver bombs, napalm, pollution and death, but for that St-Exupéry is no more 
to blame than signposts are for car crashes. He is just someone who pulled on a 
leather flying jacket, climbed into the exposed cockpit of a flimsy plane, got 
its propellers roaring and pointed its nose into the vast blackness of the 
night sky: his future, our present.

We should applaud him - and by God we should read him.
 