
Pop on TV in the mid-60s was the chaotic and brash Ready Steady Go! – the 
audience milled about the studio while cameras pushed through; artists 
performed from four stages. It was a weekly party of pop, rock and soul. The 
singers were the stars but the audience was almost as big a part of the show.

This style had been pioneered by Jack Good, the man who put Oh Boy! on British 
TV in the 50s. He decided rock'n'roll wasn't the music itself; it was the 
response to the music. But when he asked the BBC if he could have teenagers 
dancing in the studio, bosses said: "Certainly not! Teenagers would break up 
the set." So Good put the scenery on casters and invited BBC executives to 
inspect it. "When they'd gone, I wheeled it away and waved the kids on to the 
set," he later said. "The head of light entertainment came up to the control 
room in the middle of the show and said: 'You can't do this!' I said: 'I'm 
doing it. Cut to camera five.'"

Ready Steady Go! had the same sense of chaos but with a new sense of style. On 
the day before each show, the production team, not much older than fans 
themselves, handpicked the audience from good-looking kids on Carnaby Street. 
The designer of the day was Mary Quant, who said: "The crotch is the most 
natural erogenous zone ... my clothes are designed to lead the eye to it." 
Cathy McGowan, the show's young compere, was a Quant lookalike and the girls in 
the audience dressed like her. For balance, only the prettiest guys were 
chosen, and the young male compere was obviously gay. Not that he could say he 
was at that time, and people such as him weren't normally allowed to front 
shows. They could be like Kenneth Williams – so camp it was funny – but this 
guy wasn't like that. He was Michael Aldred – a young boy-next-door. All of 
which helped give the show its distinctive look.

It couldn't have happened at the BBC. Ready Steady Go! was produced for ITV by 
Associated-Rediffusion, a company headed up by ex-naval types who ran it like a 
ship, posting schedules in seafaring jargon: "Rehearsals will begin at eight 
bells on the lower deck."

On Friday at 6pm, Manfred Mann's 5-4-3-2-1 came crashing out of the TV and the 
screen announced: "The weekend starts here!" For anyone even vaguely interested 
in music, fashion, or what was happening away from the dull world of adults, it 
was a must.

Most adults hated it. Paul Johnson, writing in the New Statesman, called pop 
fans "the least fortunate of their generation, the dull, the idle, the 
failuresn ... a fearful indictment of our education system ..." On the other 
hand, William Deedes, a minister in two successive Tory governments, noticed 
the growth of "a cultural movement among the young which may become part of the 
history of our time".

Dusty Springfield persuaded Vicki Wickham, one of the show's producers, to do 
a Motown special that she would introduce. It had the Supremes, Stevie Wonder, 
the Miracles and Martha and the Vandellas. That night was the launch of soul 
music in the UK. But some people weren't ready for it. Britain in those days 
had no black singers or bands, only The Black and White Minstrel show. When 
James Brown performed, Wickham remembers people calling up spewing racial 
abuse. "I was horrified. Why not just switch off?"

By the end of its second year, Ready Steady Go! had broken dozens of new acts. 
The Beatles, the Rolling Stones, the Yardbirds, the Searchers, the Pretty 
Things, the Kinks, the Animals, the Who, Manfred Mann, Sandie Shaw, Donovan, 
the Walker Brothers, Cilla Black, Lulu, Springfield, and even Jimi Hendrix – 
all made their first TV appearances on the show. And though the Beatles were 
already stars when the programme started, they appeared on it regularly – 
party-goers in chief.

The BBC finally realised it needed to come up with something to compete. Its 
answer was Top of the Pops, a plastic copy broadcast from a disused church in 
Manchester, with an audience that turned up unvetted. It had none of the style, 
or improvised immediacy of Ready Steady Go!. Gone was the sense that something 
unexpected might happen, and instead of young announcers, there was a jokey 
character who might have come from pantomime – Jimmy Savile, with his six-inch 
cigar.

But the new show had one advantage. The top 20 chart was published on 
Thursdays. The BBC was given the lowdown two days earlier. The producers cast 
and scripted the show on Tuesdays, then rehearsed and broadcast it on 
Wednesday. To know who was new in the chart, or which song had gone to No 1, 
you had to watch it. Gradually, TOTP started pulling in the larger audience.
 