
The popular novelist Alexander McCall Smith – best known for his No 1 Ladies’ 
Detective Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/04/review-no1-ladies-detective-agency-alexander-mccall-smith>
 featuring Precious Ramotswe – has never been much of a fan of modern 
technology. Back in 2011, he told an audience at the Hay festival, “Botswana is 
absolutely crammed full of mobile phones, everybody has one, but not in my 
books. The reason why mobile phones and other forms of invasive technology 
don’t appear in my novels is because if I see something I don’t like, I don’t 
mention it. I’m a great believer in denial.”

Each to his own. If I was in need of a private detective, I’m not sure I would 
go to one who refused to use a mobile phone and had never heard of the 
internet. I’d rather suspect I was limiting my chances of getting my problem 
solved. But what do I know? Precious Ramotswe has solved more cases while 
relaxing over a cup of rooibos tea than many other fictional private eyes have 
cracked while struggling to get a decent Vodafone signal.

We don’t know Elena Ferrante – and that’s exactly why her success is so 
wonderful | Deborah Orr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/02/we-dont-know-elena-ferrante>
If anything, McCall Smith’s technophobia has hardened over the past four 
years. At a recent event at Daunt Books in central London, he said: “Modern 
technology spoils a sense of drama. Look what antibiotics would do to opera. 
Look at La Bohème. It would be, “Mimi starts to cough. Here’s the penicillin … 
and she gets better!”

He does have a point, while managing to miss the wider one. Not only would 
Puccini have given Mimi another illness if penicillin had been around at the 
turn of the 20th century, he fails to appreciate the greater leap of 
imagination. When Violetta is dying of tuberculosis during the third act of La 
Traviata, the biggest surprise isn’t that a quack hasn’t knocked up some 
antibiotics 100 years ahead of Alexander Fleming, it’s that the soprano has 
enough breath to sing some of the most exquisite music Verdi ever wrote. Even 
to sing pianissimo, require phenomenal breath control.

Almost every novel – with the exception of some sci-fi and magical realism – 
is firmly rooted in the time in which it was written. The classics survive both 
due to the quality of the writing and the imagination of the reader to make the 
conceptual leap to the book’s more timeless properties. How many people get to 
the end of Jane Eyre and think if only Mr Rochester had installed a smoke alarm 
in the attic, his mad wife wouldn’t have been able to commit suicide and he 
wouldn’t have become hideously disfigured while trying to save her?

The 100 best novels written in English: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/the-100-best-novels-written-in-english-the-full-list>
Who comes out of a performance of Romeo and Juliet sobbing that if only the 
couple had done the obvious thing and made their own arrangements by text 
instead of relying on that idiot Friar Laurence, then they could have lived 
happily ever after? “O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou, Romeo?” “Sorry babes, 
running a few mins late. See you soon and go easy on the poison xxx.” Who reads 
Howards End shaking their heads at the medical profession’s inability to detect 
Leonard Bast’s tragically weak heart with a regular ECG? With a bit more 
imagination, EM Forster could have ended the novel in an extended legal case of 
medical negligence. Maybe he thought Dickens had already done that theme to 
death in the Jarndyce v Jarndyce case in Bleak House.

It’s as if McCall Smith believes the world has to stand still for the creative 
mind to function. Unless he sincerely believes it would have been better if 
scientists had never developed life-saving drugs and technology. The point 
about literature and storytelling is that it is endlessly adaptable. Modern TV 
crime dramas bear little resemblance to Dixon of Dock Green, Z Cars or Juliet 
Bravo, and they aren’t any the worse for it.Mobile phones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mobilephones> and computers have merely 
become established as narrative devices in their own right. There are still 
just as many good and bad books and good and bad TV cop shows. Technology 
hasn’t been the tipping point. And I, for one, wouldn’t be in the slightest bit 
disappointed if Precious Ramotswe was occasionally allowed to use a mobile 
phone. If only to remind her husband, Mr JLB Matekoni, that she was running 
short of rooibos tea.
 