
Teenager's career aspirations do not match the demands of the job market 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-21762564>, new research has suggested. The 
report, by theEducation and Employers Taskforce 
<http://www.educationandemployers.org/>, examined the ambitions of young people 
aged 13 to 18 and mapped them against projections for skills demands.

For example, it found that the culture, media and sport industry is 
over-subscribed, while others – such as building and construction – are 
under-subscribed.

There were some positive findings, however, about how realistic young people 
are when it comes to their choice of career. The most popular job among 
teenagers aged 13 to 14 is an actor, but this falls out of the top ten by the 
time teenagers reach 17-18 years old.

The results are fairly predictable but this type of research helps to ensure 
we don't rely on un-evidenced assumptions. That said, the report itself 
acknowledges that there have been other recent studies on this very topic which 
have reached the same conclusion.

The survey sample for the research was taken from b-live 
<http://www.b-live.com/>'s database. b-live is a registration-based website and 
has links with schools, so it provides a useful way to find young people with 
an interest in careers. But using b-live to provide a sample also skews the 
results: due to the nature of the site, respondents are already engaged with 
the careers process and have been exposed to the careers that b-live promotes - 
making them more likely to be interested in those specific roles.

11,759 young people participated and were invited to click on jobs from a list 
of 69 occupations across a "multitude of UK industrial sectors". This is where 
my nerd pulse quickens. In the UK, we use a system called the Standard 
Occupational Classification (SOC) 2010 to distinguish different kinds of job. 
This is a very fine piece of work, and the researchers drew from it to create 
their stripped-down jobs list.

But if you collapse a range of popular and common occupations – all teachers 
and lecturers into one job, for example - while separating other similar 
occupations – advertising and PR, for instance – then your answers are partly 
driven by the choices you have offered. There is no perfect solution, of course 
– you don't want to offer every possible job, because that list doesn't exist, 
young people won't have heard of many of the jobs on offer and the numbers 
you'd get for each one would be too small to do anything with.

Then there's the question of what we're comparing the data against – labour 
market projections. It's important that we try to estimate future skills demand 
to have some level of preparedness for the future. It's also important to 
remember that no matter how good these estimates are – and ours are pretty good 
– they're always wrong. At the moment, the economic outlook is pretty uncertain 
and we're not sure what the rest of 2013 will bring, let alone 2023.

At the heart of this are some big questions. When should people be sure what 
career they want to do? And how do they make those decisions? This age group 
will be influenced by external factors too. For example, if you're a teenager 
in thenorth-west with a parent working for AstraZeneca, does science look that 
good a career this morning 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/mar/18/astrazeneca-cut-jobs-george-osborne-constituency>
? Meanwhile, the report finds 7% of privately-educated 15-16 year–olds want to 
be lawyers. The chances are that some of those students have parents in the law 
and can see it's brought them an agreeable lifestyle. Why shouldn't they aspire 
to that?

In the end the report finds that, as students get older, fewer of them want to 
be actors and TV presenters, and more of them want to be middle-class 
professionals. Most of the young people surveyed want a career that will 
require a degree. The most popular career path for 17 to 18 year-olds was to be 
a teacher. This may not fit the labour market we actually have, but it does fit 
with society's constant exhortations to young people to be aspirational.

We have a good, flexible education system in this country, particularly in 
higher education. You can take a physics degree, but that doesn't mean you have 
to be a physicist. And while effective careers advice is a good idea, do we 
really want 18 year-olds to be set on a firm career path already? I'm not sure 
that's a good idea in a rapidly-changing jobs market, when they'll still be 
working 50 years from now. We need them to be flexible and able to turn their 
hand to a range of jobs. This report helps show that our teenagers are still 
adapting their ideas about careers, and it's our job to ensure that these ideas 
are realistic and fit in with the world they'll be entering.

Charlie Ball is deputy director of research at the Higher Education Careers 
Services Unit <http://www.hecsu.ac.uk/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 