
Alassane Ouattara  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>was 
sworn in as president of Ivory Coast in May 2011, after a short, sharp 
post-electoral crisis in which 3,000 died, according to the United Nations. But 
three years later justice has still not been done, permanently jeopardising the 
reconciliation process.

The transfer of Charles Blé Goudé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/10/ivory-coast-militia-leader-trial>
 to the international criminal court last month is emblematic of at least part 
of the problem. A key figure in the regime led byPresident Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo>, he is being prosecuted by 
the court on four charges of crimes against humanity committed during the 
fighting that followed the disputed 2010 presidential election.

In dispatching the charismatic Goudé to The Hague, the Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> was merely complying with its 
international obligations, a year after ratifying the Treaty of Rome. But it 
hesitated a long time before doing so. In another extremely sensitive case, the 
government dismissed the ICC arrest warrant for Simone Gbagbo, the former first 
lady, under prosecution on the same charges. It assured the tribunal that 
Ivorian courts had the willpower and capacity to bring her to trial on the same 
charges.

It is obviously legitimate for the Ivory Coast to want to do justice itself, 
but its determination is open to doubt. Several months ago, having tired of 
judicial proceedings, Ouattara turned his attention to the job of patching up 
relations with the opposition, changing tack after the clampdown on Gbagbo 
supporters following the latter'sarrest in April 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/11/ivory-coast-former-leader-arrested>
. Some 800 people were imprisoned at the time, and tens of thousands of others 
fled to Liberia, Ghana or Togo.

One of the conditions set by Gbagbo's Ivorian Popular Front (FPI), before 
taking part in the democratic process, was the release of these prisoners and 
measures to ease the return of refugees. Reconciliation is essential, to 
prepare for the presidential election next year and convince foreign investors 
that a modicum of stability has been restored in a country in desperate need of 
funds to rebuild its infrastructure.

Ouattara has slowly given way. The authorities have appealed to refugees, 
promising them safety. Marcel Gossio, a pillar of the previous regime, returned 
in January, after a two-year exile in Morocco. Despite charges brought by local 
courts and UN accusations that he helped fund Gbagbo's militia, the former head 
of the port of Abidjan has not been bothered.

More than 120 detainees were released on parole in January. At the same 
moment, defence minister Paul Koffi Koffi staged a lavish ceremony in honour of 
more 1,200 returning soldiers who served in the army under the previous regime. 
"You will be treated without discrimination: no one has been bothered by the 
courts or security forces since their return," he said. "Tell the others to 
come back, regardless of the acts they may have committed." His message must 
have been heard because about 4,000 soldiers have reported to the ministry 
since returning from exile.

Many in civil society equate these moves with a form of impunity. The Ivorian 
Human Rights Movement (MIDH) recently condemned "dangerous meddling in the 
judicial arena by the executive". Several members of the UN mission have voiced 
concern about the risks entailed by an across-the-board amnesty. In January 
human rights campaigners and lending agencies had to bring pressure on the 
authorities to extend the mandate of the special unit investigating crimes 
committed during the troubles. But not a single trial has yet been organised.

There is good reason to wonder how far co-operation with the ICC will go. The 
court does not only want to prosecute Gbagbo supporters. Several former 
military leaders of the Forces Nouvelles – which helped oust the former 
president – have also been accused of war crimes. They now occupy key positions 
in the army and civil service. Not only have they not been prosecuted; they 
have actually been promoted.

The day that Goudé left for the Netherlands, the FPI announced it was breaking 
off dialogue with the government, condemning "a serious hindrance to 
reconciliation".

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>, 
which incorporates material from Le Monde
 