
Angela Carter’s reputation has had a switchback ride. She went, as she put it, 
from being “a very promising young writer” in the 60s to being “completely 
ignored in two novels”. Her critical status revived in the 80s with the 
reimagined fairy stories ofThe Bloody Chamber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/24/classics.angelacarter> and the 
filmsThe Magic Toyshop and The Company of Wolves, but she never enjoyed what 
she called “the pleasantest but most evanescent kind of fame, which is that 
during your own lifetime”. Since her death in 1992 her stock has risen. She has 
been called one of the 20th century’s best writers and Lambeth council has 
named a street in Brixton after her.

In 2012, when the London Review of Books asked me to write a piece on Carter’s 
work, I had mixed feelings. I was of the 80s generation that did not so much 
read as inhale her in my 20s, and what impresses you at that age doesn’t always 
bear revisiting. She did. I found her improved by time, having outgrown the 
categories – magic realist, feminist, gothic – into which she had been 
awkwardly crammed. I realised too that she was funnier than my earnest younger 
self had noticed, so I reread all of the work I could find. But I found no 
poetry.

I knew she had written verse because my first husband, the poet Christopher 
Logue, who died in 2011, had said more than once that her poetry was 
underrated. Constructing as best I could Christopher’s likely train of thought, 
I got his old school tuck box out of the wardrobe. Here he kept books he 
especially valued. Among the treasures, such as his letter from Ezra Pound, I 
found a stapled, roneoed copy of Carter’s poem “Unicorn”, published in Bristol 
in 1966.

In it I saw, as if in bud, the ideas that grew into the extravagant, sometimes 
sinister blossoms of her later work. The poem reconfigures the myth of the lady 
and the unicorn, subject of a million tapestries and table mats. Carter 
rearranges it almost literally, as if playing with characters in a toy theatre. 
“Let us cut out and assemble our pieces,” runs the first line, and later the 
reader is told to “bend the tab, slit in slot marked ‘X’”. At 23 it seems that 
Carter had arrived, as if in a single bound, in the mysterious forest that was 
to keep her supplied with ideas for the rest of her life. She saw at once how 
myths and folk tales offer a kind of narrative flat pack, pre-existing 
characters and stories that can be restructured according to the tastes of each 
generation.

“Unicorn”, like The Bloody Chamber, draws out what a post-Freudian age sees 
beneath the surface – the phallic unicorn’s horn, the virgin in the garden – 
draws it out, blows it up into imagery as lurid as a flashing neon sign outside 
a sex shop and then drops it bathetically flat at the end. This woodland’s 
“innocent and fragile leaves” conceal the strip-club agents who are using an 
unappealing virgin, “raw and huge … the only virgin to be had” to lure the 
unicorn. As Carter once said of Walter de la Mare, a writer she, surprisingly 
perhaps, much admired, these are images that stick like a splinter in the mind.

I decided to try to republish as much of the verse as I could find. There is 
not much. Carter’s career as a poet lasted less than a decade and was 
concentrated in three years, from 1963 to 1966. The 60s were, as she said, “not 
like the movies”. The poems, and the magazines in which she published them, are 
redolent of a period that still felt itself to be postwar, where the last 
Edwardians overlapped with the Angry Young Men. They reveal a melancholy urban 
landscape through which pop art and swinging London are starting to burst like 
weeds on a bomb site. Carter’s first novel appeared in the year the Beatles’ 
“Paperback Writer” topped the charts, and soon afterwards she more or less 
stopped writing verse. Most of what she did write, however, had its roots in 
the strange little drama set in motion in “Unicorn”.

• Unicorn: The Poetry of Angela Carter is published by Profile. To order a 
copy for £7.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/351151/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 