
It's the old story - you wait hours for an atheist bus and then 26 of them 
come along at once. Every bus trundling along London's Euston Road at the 
moment seems to have the advice offered byRichard Dawkins 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/dawkins> and the Humanists on its side, that 
God probably does not exist so you should enjoy your life. I can imagine that 
loads of religious people, charmed by the none-too-subtle implication that they 
are miserable swine, are converted by this poster into radical secularists. I, 
on the other hand, find my atheism seriously challenged by the anxiety that I 
may be just as self-regarding asthe promoters of this poster 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/audio/2009/jan/07/atheist-bus-campaign-richard-dawkins>
.

Apart from anything else, the Dawkins view encourages a caricature of the 
history of science. It dramatises a clash between scientific reason and 
religious superstition that is supposedly as intense today as it was in the age 
of Galileo. But this is a schoolchild's version of the history of science. It 
is simplistic and inaccurate to imagine that scientific discovery has ever been 
either the fruit, or the seed, of pure reason. Science, like art, is 
imaginative. And the imaginative pictures of the universe created by the great 
scientists have rarely been free of ideas that in the nouveau atheist view are 
irrational.

Galileo is in the news 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/jan/23/galileo-dna-test> - it's his 400th 
anniversary, so naturally scientific historians in Florence want to exhume his 
body and examine its DNA. In the modern imagination, Galileo was a man of 
reason who defied the Catholic church with his courageous defence of 
Copernicus's sun-centred solar system. But was he a modern secularist? To 
believe this you have to ignore the fact that he was influenced by Renaissance 
hermeticism, an occult philosophy in which the sun is a source of spiritual 
vitality - in other words, his heliocentrism is partly mystical.

Galileo was tragic, ultimately capitulating to the church to avoid the fate of 
his contemporary Giordano Bruno, burned alive for his beliefs. Bruno's statue 
stands on the site of his execution on Rome's Campo dei Fiori. But Bruno was 
not martyred for the defence of pure science: he promoted magic, as well as 
hypothesising multiple universes.

Galileo and Bruno were makers of modern science who were - as we all are - 
shaped by the assumptions of their age. The list goes on. Isaac Newton was 
fascinated by alchemy. The makers of modern natural history include not just 
Darwin, but eccentrics like Buckland and Owen who tried to reconcile fossils 
with religious faith. Richard Owen was a religious bigot, but he named the 
dinosaurs and founded the Natural History Museum. And Einstein said that God 
does not play dice.

The mind does not think in a vacuum, and science never has existed in a 
God-free zone. Reason will probably always have to live with unreason. Now 
enjoy impurity.
 