 Two of the passengers killed in the crash of Flight 587 had escaped death in 
the World Trade Centre attack two months previously,
Felix Sanchez, 29, a broker at Merrill Lynch, fled his office in the twin 
towers minutes before they collapsed.

His friend Sid Wilson said: "After the World Trade Centre, he had a renewed 
outlook on life - and the last time I saw him, he was so high on life. I can't 
believe this."

Hilda Mayor, 26, worked in a cafe on the ground floor of the north tower and 
escaped unharmed on September 11.

On Monday she was flying to the Dominican Republic to pick up her children who 
were staying with relatives.

Yesterday, as the stories of those who died on the American Airways Airbus 
began to be told, it became clear that the vast majority of those flying to the 
Dominican Republic were returning to the island, where they were born, for a 
much-dreamed about and long saved-for trip.

They were eulogies to lives spent scrimping and saving, to time spent apart 
from families and friends in order to make a new life and earn more money in 
New York.

Maximo Balerio worked in a New York bodega, regularly putting in a 17-hour day 
to save enough to fly to see his wife and two children.

He saved all his money for his family.

Taxi driver Francisco Diaz was returning to visit his wife Yolie and two 
babies.

Dominga Matias, 43, was a mother of three who worked in a clothing factory and 
was afraid of flying. But she tried to overcome her fear so she might visit her 
sick mother.

One family were taking their young son to see his grandparents for the first 
time, a trip that had taken two years to save for.

Petty Officer Ruben Rodriguez, 32, took the flight to meet his wife and 
children in the Dominican Republic, a relative said. He had spent the weekend 
visiting family in New York after a seven-month stint on the aircraft carrier 
USS Enterprise.

Felipe Rodriguez said: "My brother's three-year-old son keeps saying to his 
mother, 'When's Daddy coming? Where's Daddy?'

"All we want is the body back so we can mourn properly."

Sobeira Cedeno, 51, was on her way to the Dominican Republic with her husband, 
Celso, 61, to look for a retirement home.

Ilsa Beauchamps stayed at home in New York with her six-year-old daughter 
Gabriel while her husband Roberto, 41, flew off with their two sons, Lorenzo, 
four, and Roberto, one. She had to be taken to hospital when she heard about 
the crash.

Five members of the De La Cruz family were lost. In Providence, Rhode Island, 
dozens of mourners packed a spartan apartment to mourn Leonardo De La Cruz, his 
wife, Clara, their two children and his father, who were going to a family 
baptism.

Lidia Fajardo, 40, who was flying with her two young children, was a daughter 
of Cuco Valoy, a Dominican singer known as El Brujo - the sorcerer.

Five people were reported missing in Rockaway, which had already lost about 90 
people, mainly firefighters, on September 11.

The mayor of New York, Rudolph Giuliani, said the plane had come down two 
blocks from St Francis de Sales church, where more than 30 funerals and 
memorial services were held for victims of the attack on the twin towers.

Two Rockaway residents who died were identified as Thomas and Helen Concanno, 
an elderly couple whose house took a direct hit.

Two sisters were practising basketball when the plane crashed, sending a blaze 
of flames roaring down their block and killing their mother and brother, who 
were at home.

A mother and daughter managed to leave their house but her nightshift-working 
husband was asleep upstairs and could not make it out of the house before the 
first floor collapsed in flames.

Also lost were Captain Edward States, First Officer Sten Molin, and seven 
American Airlines cabin crew.
 