
Dr George Lewis could have been forgiven for swallowing hard and turning pale 
when finally given access to the collected files of the House of Un-American 
Activities Committee during the period 1945 to 1975. "There was 1,245ft of 
archive material," he recalls. "That's the equivalent of three-and-a-half feet 
of box files a month every month for 30 years."

The director of American studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> at Leicester University 
has embarked on what he believes to be the first sustained historical analysis 
of the term "un-American", so he first took a look at HUAC's attempts to define 
their terms. "I discovered that they were still trying to work out exactly what 
'un-American' meant three decades after someone had set up a committee to 
investigate it."

The term "un-American" goes back a long way – almost to the dawn of the 
republic, Lewis has discovered. "'It was in use pretty well as soon as the term 
'American' was coined," he says. "To be American became an expression of 
ideology as well as nationalism."

And of course, it's still in use today, particularly by supporters of the Tea 
Party movement in their critiques of President Barack Obama's healthcare 
reforms. It was the use of the term by Michele Bachmann – now a declared 
candidate for the presidency – in 2008 in reference to Barack Obama as 
"un-American" that convinced Lewis of the need to try to pin down the nebulous 
concept.

Lewis is two-thirds of the way through a three-year project, supported by 
£111,000 from the British Academy, which also funded an inter-disciplinary 
conference at Leicester last week for scholars from both sides of the Atlantic. 
One of the more intriguing subject headings was When Modern Art Was Un-American.

"There was a big campaign against modern art in California in the 50s," Lewis 
explains. "On the east coast, meanwhile, there was a move against jazz as 
un-American. Harlem became the den of un-American filth in the rightwing 
imagination. Later, there were similar campaigns against rock 'n' roll. One of 
the things that got me interested in this project is that it's not just a 
top-down phenomenon. Being 'un-American' influenced rhetoric at every level of 
society."

For research purposes, Lewis has been witnessing Tea Party rallies at first 
hand with their placards referring to Obama's "un-American" healthcare 
programme. "It has become a coded word for them," he says. "If they want to 
infer that his programme is 'socialised medicine' then that's what it will be 
taken to mean. If they want to remind people that he's black, then that's what 
it'll be taken to mean. Ditto: the implication made when they say his second 
name is Hussein."

Talk-show hosts during the 2008 election, he points out, never asked Obama's 
Republican opponent, John McCain, about his middle name. "(It's Sidney.)" But 
then an elderly "President McCain" could have been a heart attack away from 
handing the keys of the White House to his running mate, the all-American Sarah 
Palin. Having weighed that up, floating voters decided that Obama was American 
enough for them.
 