
Employers can sometimes give the impression that they consider anyone who has 
been away from the workplace for a number of years to be an inconvenience when 
they return due to the need for re-training and readajusting. This negative 
attitude has meant that many people view a return to work as daunting, and in 
some cases, near-impossible.

The majority of returning employees are women who have taken a break from 
their career to have a family. Women who have been away from the workplace for 
a while can feel as though they've lost touch with the world of work, 
especially when the pace of technological and regulatory change is as rapid as 
it is in today's tough economic climate.

An increasing number of employers, however, are now recognising that returning 
talent brings new skills, which directly benefit a company's performance: 
returning employees are generally enthusiastic, motivated and bring fresh ideas 
to the workplace.

So if you're considering a return to the workplace after a period away, here 
is some advice to aid your transition.

Keep up the confidence

Parents and carers need to recognise and embrace the new skills they have 
acquired: looking after family, running a home or caring for a relative 
combines management, budgeting and diplomacy. Despite this, however, many 
professionals lack confidence and don't realise that their experience is still 
valuable and relevant – having children does not render prior capabilities null 
and void.

Nor should returning employees be afraid of not being fully up-to-speed with 
various regulatory or technology developments. Internal processes are 
constantly changing which means that all employees – new or old – require 
regular training.

But it's important not to fall too far behind. While away, you could offer 
your services for free to keep your skills in use and develop your wider 
experience. For example, could you join your child's parent-teacher association 
or board of governors? Could you become treasurer for a local charity? Taking 
up opportunities such as these demonstrates commitment and proves you can 
manage your time efficiently.

Professionals looking to return to work may also find it useful to follow the 
news, read trade press and keep an eye on relevant social media to help them 
stay informed about challenges and trends in their sector.

Don't stop networking

Traditionally, many women tend to have narrower business networks than men. 
After three years out of work these can begin to break down, making it even 
harder to find employment via previous contacts. To widen your network and 
enhance your opportunities of identifying an appropriate route back into work, 
you need to keep your CV updated and join other networking groups.

Sites such as LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook allow you to stay in touch with 
former colleagues and acquaintances. Showing an interest in your career – by 
sharing interesting articles, commenting on relevant legislation or issues 
affecting your sector – will also show potential employers that you're serious 
about returning to work. Be upfront and honest with former colleagues and 
managers about your intention to return to work. They may be able to keep you 
informed about changes in the workplace and can help you stay abreast of 
potential job openings too.

Attending networking events also allows you to connect in-person with a wide 
range of people. These don't have to be costly, for example, many universities 
host lectures on various topics which are open to the public and where you 
could meet other like-minded professionals. Don't be afraid to share your 
contact details with the people you meet and follow-up with them afterwards.

Speak to other parents and carers too as many will be in a similar situation 
to you, giving you both the opportunity to exchange tips and pass on contacts 
and job opportunities.

The golden rule about staying on top of your existing networks while out of 
work is simple and really isn't any different to what you do to stay in touch 
with people while you are in work. A well-worded email works well, but if you 
can meet up for a coffee, even better.

Support networks

Once you have secured a job, remember that an increasing number of employers 
recognise the importance of parent and carer networks and peer-to-peer coaching 
to provide on-going support. For example, Bank of America Merrill Lynch's 
Returning Talent programme helps women and men re-enter the workforce after 
time away caring for family. It offers practical guidance on CV writing and 
interview coaching, and advice from other bank executives who balance their 
work and home lives.

If your employer doesn't already offer networks or coaching, you could suggest 
the idea to your manager or HR department. It may involve some effort on your 
part to help get things up and running, but should be seen as an opportunity to 
demonstrate your motivation and organisational skills.

If this isn't an option, don't be disheartened. Look for support networks and 
coaching that already exist in your local community. This could be through your 
council, church or a charity, for example. There is also nothing stopping you 
creating your own peer-to-peer network with like-minded colleagues or parents 
you meet at your childrens' nursery or school.

Keep up the good work

Returning to work after time out to care for your family can be daunting, but 
it can also be hugely rewarding. It can take some time, so don't be 
disappointed if you don't find a job immediately. The most important thing is 
to be positive, keep up your networking and build your confidence. Show willing 
and be clear about your skillset so that you are front of mind when job 
opportunities arise.

Michelle Fullerton is the head of diversity and inclusion for Europe and 
emerging markets atBank of America Merrill Lynch 
<http://corp.bankofamerica.com/business/ci/home?cm_mmc=GBAM-Integrated-_-Google-PS-_-bank%20of%20america%20merrill%20lynch-_-Global%20-%20Brand%20Core%20Exact>
.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook. <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>
 