
Tamim Al-Barghouti

 Photograph: © Nasser Nuri/Reuters 
In the piece I wrote for the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jan/28/after-tunisia-tamim-al-barghouti-palestine>
, published on 27 January 2011, only two days after the outbreak of the 
Egyptian revolution, I said: "Now the wave is coming. I will venture to say 
that the Egyptian regime has already fallen: it might take some time, but the 
fear, the perception that the regime is invincible has gone once and for all." 
I also said: "Revolutions travel, and in the Arab world they travel faster […] 
Tunisia sent out the message that client regimes fall – that if we can drive 
the empires out, we will surely be able to drive out their vassals." Both 
predictions came true – Mubarak's regime fell, and revolutions spread across 
the Arab world.

But I also made a third prediction. I said: "Cairo knows and Cairo moves. 
Ramallah worries that an empowered Cairo means an empowered Gaza, and Tel Aviv 
and Washington know that instead of just Iran, they will now have to worry 
about Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and Palestine all at once." This one has not 
yet come true – my argument here is that it will.

In Egypt, power went from Mubarak to his generals. But they are incompetent 
and weak. Seeing how their commander-in-chief was abandoned by his old allies, 
they have little faith in US support. They also know they can't shoot at large 
crowds. The generals do order their troops to shoot, but only at small 
demonstrations. When, in retaliation for such killings, the squares fill up, 
the generals back down and offer concessions. Such concessions are usually not 
enough, which results in another round of small demonstrations, killings, 
million-man marches, and then concessions again.

Despite the casualties, Tahrir Square has been ruling Egypt almost as much as 
the generals over the past year. If Egypt is bound eventually to break away 
from the grip of the military, the US will have lost a strategic ally that it 
can only compensate by establishing a friendly regime in Syria. But US support 
for the Syrian opposition is more harmful than useful, as it allows the 
Damascus regime to portray the opposition as an American pawn. This, coupled 
with fear of a sectarian civil war between Sunnis and Alawites, is keeping 
people in Damascus and Aleppo at home.

In addition, even to the Egyptian Muslim Brothers, who are most sympathetic to 
the Syrian opposition, a civil war in Syria, or a pro-American regime that 
would relive Israel from Hezbollah's pressure to the north, is a direct threat 
to Cairo's national interests. A free Cairo will maintain an anti-Israeli 
Damascus. If the Syrian foreign alliances are maintained, an 
Egyptian-Syrian-Lebanese, Turkish-Iranian-Iraqi alliance in the Middle East 
will emerge that is strong enough to counter, and even threaten, American 
influence in the region and dictate the outcome of any settlement to the 
Arab-Israeli conflict. In short, the entire region will achieve independence. 
It might take some time, maybe years, but freedom from colonialism and 
neocolonialism is inevitable.

Tamim Al-Barghouti is a Palestinian poet. He is currently a visiting assistant 
professor at Georgetown University's Centre for Contemporary Arab Studies.

Hisham Matar 


 Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
My generation of Libyans was born into a state of waiting. We spent decades 
hoping for a miracle. We were surrounded by fairytales, stories about how a 
knight would come riding over the hill and fix everything. We peddled all sorts 
of conspiracy theories except the one that silenced us most, the one that said 
we were helpless. Few of us could remember a time before this waiting. Even 
fewer could imagine a life beyond it. Therefore, our problem was chiefly one of 
the imagination. We could not picture how to live in action rather than in hope.

That was the shape of our horizon. And we were almost resigned to it. Even our 
hopes seemed unconvincing. We indulged in them nonetheless, whenever we felt 
safe to do so; our living rooms and dining tables witnessed many heated 
discussions. But the silence of our solitude said it all. It seemed we were 
caught between quiet defeatism and sentimental expressions of our yearnings. We 
existed in the theoretical space between the wretched political reality of our 
days and our implausible aspirations. We waited. Whenever someone asked, as 
does Vladimir inWaiting for Godot 
<http://samuel-beckett.net/Waiting_for_Godot_Part1.html>, "What do we do now?" 
the answer was as prompt and horrific as Estragon's: "Wait." "Yes, but while 
waiting," Vladimir goes on. "What about hanging ourselves?" Estragon suggests. 
For us too the choice seemed as stark and darkly comical; for, yes, we knew how 
to laugh at ourselves – and, contrary to popular myth, that did not make it any 
better.

But then suddenly and unexpectedly a miracle happened. It was not, thank 
goodness, heralded by a knight but by mass awakening: a chorus so vivid and 
colourful and true that it is not inappropriate to liken it to spring. It 
returned us from self-loathing and despair. The shift in our psychology is 
fundamental. The place we now find ourselves in is like a state of remembering, 
as if a fog has lifted and revealed a new but somehow familiar landscape. We 
are learning to speak in practical terms. We have a new passion for detail. We 
are hopeful but are no longer living in hope. We are anxious but not afraid. We 
no longer look over our shoulder. The road ahead needs all of our attention.

We carry with us those who are reluctant, and those who perpetrated 
unspeakable crimes. We need to find a way to secure justice clean of revenge. 
We have all seen too much blood. No one can erase the images from our memory. 
Perhaps that is not a bad thing, for we must remain true to the fallen and 
their sacrifice. The silence of our solitude now no longer speaks of defeatism; 
instead, it is filled with the echoes of war. We are yet to count our dead or 
account for the disappeared. But the best thing about time is its length, as my 
father used to say. At this fleeting moment of our history at least, time seems 
to be on our side. And, finally, we are joyful.

Hisham Matar <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/hisham-matar> was born in New 
York to Libyan parents. His debut novel, In the Country of Men, shortlisted for 
the 2006 Booker prize, was followed by Anatomy of a Disappearance in 2011.



Laila Lalami 
 Laila Lalami 
What I will always treasure about 2011 is the taste of freedom. Having grown 
up in a dictatorship, I relished the sight ofZine el-Abidine Ben Ali 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-12196679> squirming in his seat last 
January, clearly at a loss for words, unsure what he should do to stem the tide 
of change in Tunisia. I knew right away that the Tunisian revolution would 
inspire democracy activists in north Africa and the Middle East.

In my country, Morocco, it led to the birth of the February 20 Movement 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2011/07/20117321108674406.html>, a 
coalition of young activists of diverse and even divergent political 
convictions, but who share the same goal: turning Morocco into a parliamentary 
monarchy, where the king reigns but does not govern. Almost immediately, the 
regime pushed back against the movement by calling its members atheists, 
separatists, Islamists, agents provocateurs funded by the west, and other 
sobriquets designed to isolate them from the mainstream. But on 20 February, 
co-ordinated marches took place in 57 cities and towns throughout the kingdom. 
They were well organised and well attended, and represented enough of a threat 
that on 9 March, only 17 days later,King Mohammad 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-13976480> announced that he planned to 
reform the constitution.

I couldn't help but notice that the Mennouni commission, which was set up to 
draft the new constitution, was appointed directly by the king, and accountable 
only to him. How could a fundamentally non-democratic entity deliver democratic 
change? Yet the king's announcement immediately garnered him wide praise in the 
west, particularly in France and the United States, with the result that world 
media attention shifted to bloodier and more chaotic uprisings elsewhere in 
north Africa. They made for better television.

While Morocco's new constitution recognises the language of the indigenous 
Amazigh people <http://www.amazigh-voice.com/v/?page_id=64&lang=en> as an 
official language, and while it gives the winning party in legislative 
elections the right to form a government, it does not limit the powers of the 
monarch. The king can still dissolve parliament at will; he chooses all 
provincial governors and the heads of national companies; and he is still the 
decider in military and religious affairs. In addition, his person is 
considered "inviolable", a stipulation that stifles any criticism of him or his 
policies. The new constitution isn't so much a step toward democracy as a 
slight shift from autocracy to lighter autocracy.

In November, legislative elections brought an Islamist party, the pro-royalist 
Party of Justice and Development, to power. The success of the PJD in the 
elections was no doubt due to the fact that it was untested, and therefore 
untainted by the corruption for which parties already in power were notorious. 
In accordance with the new constitution, the PJD's leaderAbdelilah Benkiarne 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-15946475>, was named prime minister and 
was charged with forming a government.

However, three recent developments cast doubt on the ability of the regime to 
reform. In early December, the king appointedFouad Ali el-Himma 
<http://www.economist.com/node/13964243>, the bête noire of the February 20 
movement, to the post of royal adviser. Himma is a former classmate of the king 
who, over the years, has risen to become one of the most powerful and least 
popular political figures in the country. This is a clear signal that the 
opinions of democracy activists and Moroccan voters alike do not count. 
(Himma's party had a poor showing in the elections.) Also in December, the king 
named 28 new ambassadors without consulting the prime minister or the cabinet, 
as would have been required by the constitution. In January, he finally 
appointed the new cabinet, chosen by Benkirane, but forced several of his close 
allies into key ministries.

The past year has made patently clear that no Arab regime will reform unless 
it is pressured to do so by the people and unless that pressure is maintained. 
In the case of Morocco, the new constitution, however imperfect, would not have 
been possible without the February 20 movement. And the movement, however well 
intentioned it is, has failed to put sufficient pressure on the regime. Still, 
it cannot be written off. As I write, democracy marches are still being held 
every week in Morocco and their slogans now include something no one would have 
dared say a year ago in this monarchy: "Long live the people."

Laila Lalami <http://lailalalami.com/>, is a Moroccan-born writer and critic, 
and associate professor at the University of California, Riverside.



Alaa Abd El Fattah
 Alaa Abd El Fatah 
I think we were all surprised at the speed with which Hosni Mubarak 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/hosni-mubarak> fell. We defeated the security 
establishment in one day, the thug militias in another, and found that the 
ruling National Democratic party was made of straw. In a way, the battle we're 
engaged in now is the battle we would have expected to fight against Mubarak; 
but we're fighting it against the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/02/10/world/middleeast/20110210-egypt-supreme-council.html>
 (Scaf).

And it's also surprising that Scaf should have revealed its true face so 
early. It would have made more sense for its members – since they presented 
themselves as protectors of the revolution – to allow at least some reforms. We 
expected them to keep hold of foreign affairs and the whole varied security 
system – as well as military affairs of course – but allow reforms and so 
invest in the popularity of the military as an institution. This would have 
allowed them to remain kingmakers and to intervene in the economy at critical 
moments to protect their interests. We thought they would basically try to 
quietly protect the interests of the US and Israel and keep their influence on 
politics and the economy but drop the more flagrant manifestations of the 
regime – the manifestations that had angered people so much.

And frankly, we thought it would be very difficult for us to expose this and 
deal with it effectively. But Scaf absolutely insisted on maintaining the 
corruption of the old regime, on continuing the regime's attempts to corrupt 
and manipulate the judiciary; it seems heavily invested in maintaining the 
shape of the old regime. The effect of this has been that the revolution 
continues – against Scaf.

In the 18 days from 25 January to 11 February, it seemed that the people did 
not want to destroy the state; they wanted to rescue it. The actions of Scaf, 
however, have in a sense clarified the situation. While many people still pay 
lip service to the importance of the state, and the armed forces as a pillar of 
the state, what is happening on the ground is an insistence on achieving the 
goals of the revolution. This is what the workers', farmers', students' and 
civil servants' strikes and industrial actions are all about. People are not 
looking for good governance any more but for a more profound change. There is a 
fundamental questioning – at the level of action – of what the state is or 
should be. The problem is that we have the actions but we have not developed 
the discourse to match them. Our actions are ahead of our discourse.

I'm optimistic. I believe our revolution will continue. In the elections, the 
people elected the revolution whenever they found someone who really 
represented it – otherwise they went to what they knew. We have a huge amount 
of work to do. But I believe that in this coming year the people will corner 
parliament into becoming loyal to the people and acting in response to their 
demands, not to whatever it thinks it has scripted. The revolution will not 
seize power but will push those in power towards its aims.

Alaa Abd El Fattah is an Egyptian blogger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/nov/02/egyptian-activist-alaa-accuses-army>
. He was jailed for 56 days for refusing to recognise the authority of the 
military prosecutor. He was released on 25 December.Four thousand young 
Egyptian civilians are currently serving military jail sentences 
<http://en.nomiltrials.com/>.



Mourid Barghouti 
 Photograph: Eamonn McCabe 
Step one: retrieval of political life

Optimism or pessimism is the question a year after the Arab revolution(s). 
Having in mind all the setbacks, I am optimistic. The setbacks are numerous. 
The revolutionary forces are still being demonised, killed, tortured or 
kidnapped and sent to military trials. Justice is still far away and has not 
been done yet. Killers of the demonstrators are still at large and are being 
protected; the official media is still the same box of lies; misinformation and 
disinformation and the threat of conservative forces taking over has 
materialised.

Revolution might be seen as a total failure and a sad event. But a revolution 
isnot an event. Revolution is a process – a lengthy, laborious and demanding 
one. It has its ups and downs and its many surprises too. A coup d'état is an 
event with immediate obvious and decisive results. The good thing is that Arabs 
are leaving behind a repeated practice of coups that tainted their modern 
history with illegitimate and ruthless military rulers. These rulers' most 
treacherous crime was the killing of "political life" in their countries, where 
a parliament is not a parliament, a party is not a party, opposition is not 
opposition and laws are not laws.

The past year has seen millions of Arabs engaged in discussion of political 
issues. Those millions are the guardians of their own dream, regardless of any 
official arrangements, including the election results. The banned Islamist 
groups, the only well-organised groups and the clear winners in ballot boxes, 
are now in the limelight, under public scrutiny.Rachid Ghannouchi 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/01/09/weekinreview/conversations-sheik-rashid-el-ghanoushi-islamic-fundamentalist-abroad-talks.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm>
, the leader of the An-Nahda party, gave in Tunis a simple answer to a 
journalist who asked him if his promises were genuine: "If we don't fulfil our 
promises we'll hear it again,Irhal [leave]."

If a single scene could summarise the current historic moment in the Arab 
world it would be that horizontal image of Egypt's dictator,Hosni Mubarak, 
<http://bikyamasr.com/53174/egypts-mubarak-trial-hears-final-arguments/> idly, 
helplessly, and with half-closed eyes, lying on a stretcher behind the court 
bars juxtaposed with the vertical, flying image ofAhmad El Shahat 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cOUhfAxgw24>, the young Egyptian who climbed 
the 21 floors to the top of Israel's embassy in Cairo to rip down its flag. The 
future is coming.

Mourid Barghouti <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/dec/13/mourid-barghouti>
 is a Palestinian poet.



Raja Shehadeh 
 Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
Palestine was never going to have an Arab spring, not as long as it remained 
occupied. Yet the uprisings taking place in Arab countries gave us hope. Prior 
to January 2010 the Palestinian predicament seemed desperate. Israel had a free 
hand building settlements and was refusing even to halt its colonial activities 
pending the negotiations with the Palestinians. All we got from our "Arab 
brethren" was advice that our leaders are better off doing Israel's bidding. It 
was difficult then to conceive of an improvement in our lot, and the 
possibility of ever mustering the power to bring an end to the occupation and 
the establishment of a Palestinian state.

Then, when we least expected it, uprisings began in Tunis and spread to Egypt 
and Syria. Regimes that effectively protected Israel and stood silent in the 
face of its policies of oppressing and colonising the Palestinians were 
falling. This was no less true of countries that did not have peace agreements 
with Israel, such as Syria, as it was of Egypt.

By entering into the 1978 Camp David treaty 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camp_David_Accords> with Israel, Egypt gave it 
the illusion that peace would be possible without justice to the Palestinians. 
The latePresident Sadat <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anwar_Sadat> effectively 
traded Sinai for a free hand for Israel in the West Bank where the pace of 
settling Israeli Jews began to increase – and has never abated. Ironically, in 
so doing, Sadat might have been ushering the undoing of Israel as its founders 
envisioned their country.

The rise of democracy in Arab countries helps defeat one of the major 
arguments employed by Israel in the psychological warfare it wages against us. 
Many a Palestinian has accepted the Israeli argument that we would not be 
better off in an Arab country. The treatment Palestinians got at points of 
entry to Arab countries bore this out. Until recently, Israel could boast that 
it was the only country in the Middle East where the president and high 
officials could be put on trial. Now that Mubarak is on trial, this is no 
longer the case. With democracy on the rise the will of the people is more 
likely to be respected, and there is no doubt where their sympathies lie.

With the Arab spring, a shaking up of the alliances in the region seemed 
imminent. We could hardly keep up with the pace of change. And yet if there is 
one political lesson one learns from observing political developments, it is 
that real change happens slowly. Whoever expected that the Arab spring to 
create immediate revolutionary change was dreaming. Yet where would we be 
without our dreams?

Raja Shehadeh <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/raja-shehadeh>, a lawyer and 
writer living in Ramallah, is the author of Palestinian Walks: Notes on a 
Vanishing Landscape, which won the Orwell prize in 2008. His new book, 
Occupation Diaries, will be published in the summer.



Nouri Gana 

 Nouri Gana 
Syria's Assad and Yemen's Saleh continue to prove that dictators die hard; the 
counter-revolutionary forces in Egypt and Tunisia continue to prove that 
dictatorships die even harder. After it had kick-started the Arab uprisings of 
2011, Tunisia is now on the uncharted road of democratisation, pluralism and 
coexistence in a world braced for economic and financial crisis. In the same 
manner that thousands of protestors flocked into Avenue Bourguiba on 14 January 
to prompt the unceremonious exit ofZine el-Abidine Ben Ali 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/zine-al-abidine-ben-ali>, thousands of voters 
flocked to polling booths on 23 October and queued for hours to cast their vote 
in Tunisia's historic constituent assembly elections.

Despite the more than one hundred parties and hundreds of independents that 
took part in the elections, Tunisians voted in greatest numbers for the parties 
and political leaders who have a long history of resisting and opposingBourguiba
 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/obituaries/703907.stm> and Ben Ali. Tunisians 
dealt a sobering blow to the remnants of Ben Ali's regime and to the old and 
new parties that based their entire electoral campaign on the denigration of 
the Islamic party, Ennahda. By voting for the three parties that now form the 
coalition government – Ennahda, the Congress for the Republic and Ettakatol – 
Tunisians wanted, in part, also to correct the incalculable wrongs (exile, 
imprisonment, torture, etc) that were inflicted on the militants of these 
parties under both Bourguiba and Ben Ali.

There have been, and continue to be, fears that Tunisia might slide one day 
into a theocracy, but these fears are unrealistic given the liveliness of 
public debate and the irrevocable rights of speech and protest that Tunisians 
have earned. The challenge for post-revolutionary Tunisia is rather to stay 
clear of interest- and identity-based politics, which continue to fuel debate 
and appropriate attention away from the more urgent questions of creating jobs, 
offering reparations to the families of the martyrs, and bringing the members 
of the old regime to justice.

Democracy is on the march in Tunisia, but let's hope responsibility is not on 
the wane. Tunisia's obligation to the Arab world – indeed, to the world – is 
not to let the democratising process fail and to continue to inspire 
insurrection and revolt – and, at the same time, bring economic stability. 
Tunisia will be praiseworthy if it succeeds, but the international community 
will be blameworthy if it fails to help the country fulfill its obligation.

Nouri Gana is a Tunisian writer and associate professor of comparative 
literature and Near Eastern languages and cultures at the University of 
California, Los Angeles.

Joumana Haddad 


 Photograph: Eamonn McCabe 
Are the revolts that occurred and that are occurring in the Arab world real 
revolutions? Are they also women's revolutions? The prognostics of the 
Egyptian, Tunisian and Lybian revolutions are not promising, to say the least, 
and we are still far from being rid of the patriarchal monopolisation of 
private and public life. One form of dictatorship seems to be getting replaced 
with another form: religious integralism. What kind of revolts are these if 
women are content to be just pawns "mobilised" at will, and neglected when 
decisions should be made? What revolutions, if these revolutions did not turn 
the tables of patriarchy on the heads of those oppressors, and if they will 
only bring forth a new form of backwardness and subjugation?

In view of the rotten Arab regimes (those that have fallen and those that 
undoubtedly will), which specialise in ignoring women's rights and debasing 
them, when will women in the Arab world move from the cry of "give me my 
rights" to the cry: "I will take my rights with my own hands"? When will the 
Arab woman believe that she was not just born to be married, bear children, 
obey, hide, be sold by and serve the men of her family? When will she realise 
that all talk of democracy is bullshit without equality with men? And that all 
talk of change and modernisation is bullshit, if her situation and position are 
not re-evaluated? When will she become furious over the gross insults that she 
is subjected to, and which aim at erasing her daily, in all fields? When will 
she stop participating in the fortification of the patriarchal system, with its 
stale values and barbed wires?

When will the "bomb" of Arab women explode? I am speaking here of the bomb of 
her ability, ambition, liberty, strength and rights. The bomb of her anger at 
what is imposed on her and which she mostly accepts uncritically. The bomb of 
her self-confidence.That is the revolution we need. And that is the revolution 
we deserve.

Joumana Haddad <http://www.joumanahaddad.com/> is a Lebanese writer and 
journalist, author of I Killed Scheherazade: Confessions of an Angry Arab 
Woman, published by Saqi Books.



Samar Yazbek 


 Samar Yazbek 
It's not easy to describe exactly how I feel about what's going on in Syria. 
It's like talking about a Surrealist painting where I'm both the artist and the 
colours; or I might even go so far as to say it's like seeing my own heart 
suspended in front of me, and I'm supposed to talk about it somehow, like a 
scene from some fantasy movie: a beating heart running away as its body chases 
after it.

In Syria great truths overturn history; they are products of the impossible. 
Simple and ordinary folk are the stuff of proverbs and epics in demanding their 
freedom and dignity in the face of the killing machine, and in spite of all the 
mechanisms of media deception practised by the regime. Here is a new history on 
which the whole world must concentrate. The people's revolution has been 
defined by two pillars that embodied the moral foundation of the intifada: 
dignity and non-violence. Individual autonomy is the most important human right 
one can ask for, through a commitment to the culture of life and peace, even 
when confronted with the barbarism of a military-security killing machine that 
has been in power for more than 40 years.

Those shouts for freedom and dignity rang out from the most impoverished and 
marginalised and miserable cities and small towns, before engulfing all of 
Syria. Despite all the attempts on the part of the regime to force the intifada 
into the furnace of a civil war and to encourage people to take up arms in 
order to strangle the essence of the uprising, it remains unable to turn this 
revolution into a guerilla war fought by the citizens of our united country. A 
danger looms on the horizon in the form of distractions arising from the 
regional, Arab and international situations. But the tricks concocted by the 
regime and implemented by the security apparatus and the shabbiha against the 
people of our united country have been unmasked.

The real fear now is from the scorched-earth policy pursued by the regime in 
those cities that have risen up against besiegement and starvation and 
bombardment, risen up against those who would redirect the intifada away from 
its moral and nonviolent course in such a way that people would have to take up 
arms in order to defend themselves. But weapons are the opposite of 
freedom's essence.

The heroism displayed by the Syrian people allows me to be optimistic. Their 
path of resistance makes me ever more certain that this intifada is destined to 
become a precedent for the whole world. The pure meaning of courage is to stand 
unarmed and alone in the face of murder and all the firepower that can be 
mustered by cowardly oppression.

(Translated by Max Weiss.)

Samar Yazbek is a Syrian writer and journalist. In August 2011 she wrote in 
these pages about her experience 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/03/author-author-samar-yazbek-syria> 
of being detained after a demonstration. She is one of the Beirut 39 authors.
 