
Where can you find the best horses in British Flat racing? “Newmarket” is the 
answer that comes instinctively, especially in a week such as this, when 
yearlings are being sold at auction there for seven figures. But on at least 
one measure “Yorkshire” would be a more accurate response.

Five Group races are to be staged on Qipco Champions Day at Ascot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> a week on Saturday. The favourites 
for two of those valuable and prestigious contests are trained in Ireland. 
Another is based in France. The remaining two live in this country, some four 
to five hours’ drive north of the Queen’s track, where both were shown off to 
visiting reporters on Wednesday.

Jockeys advised to avoid high street banks after frauds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/05/jockeys-high-street-banks-frauds>
Ribchester, based at Richard Fahey’s Malton yard, is no bigger than 9-4 to 
land the £1m QEII and appeared in such high spirits that he briefly threatened 
to try scaling a brick wall, prompting cries of “Can you make him do that 
again?” from photographers. Fifty miles to the west Karl Burke’s Middleham 
stable houses Quiet Reflection, 7-2 favourite for the Champions Sprint and 
still looking a picture at the end of her long season as she cantered along 
High Moor.

Local racing fans are likely to have additional reason to take pride in the 
Champions Day action because Michael Dods, based another 20 miles to the north 
at Denton, County Durham, gave every indication that he wants to run Mecca’s 
Angel against Quiet Reflection in the sprint. His popular grey mare, twice a 
Group One winner at York but not yet further afield, is to be retired at the 
end of the season and Dods is minded to give her one last spin, despitea 
disappointing defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/found-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe-aidan-obrien-first-three-horse-racing>
 in France’s Prix de l’Abbaye on Sunday.

Finishing third in such a hot race, beaten by less than a length, requires no 
excuses but, as Dods spoke, it became clear there was a list of possible 
explanations, starting with the way the race was run. Mecca’s Angel was asked 
to race prominently, to avoid becoming hemmed in from her mid-stall draw, but 
Dods notes that the two who beat her came from further back, suggesting she may 
have raced too close to a strong pace.

The ground may have been too quick, she may have been kept waiting in the 
stalls too long and it cannot have helped that, as they finally opened in front 
of her, she kicked out with enough force to open the doors behind her. “If 
she’s well, we’ll probably run her again,” he said, adding that a canter on 
Monday may decide the issue.

The race is a furlong longer than most of those Mecca’s Angel has contested 
but Dods feels she has been finishing her races strongly enough to offer hope. 
A bit of cut would be preferred but good going will be fine. “You dream about 
having horses like her,” he said. “She’s done the whole yard a lot of good and 
we dream we can find another one.”

Burke claims his Quiet Reflection has been more consistent at the highest 
level than Mecca’s Angel but the worry for him is the general health of his 
horses. “We have got a bit of coughing going round the yard; there’s a dozen 
horses coughing,” he said.

“I’m not overly concerned with her because she’s scoped clean; we’ve kept a 
good eye on that. She hasn’t coughed and she looks fantastic.”

Fahey frets that it has been a long year for Ribchester, the colt having had 
his first outing on 7 April, but adds: “His whole demeanour says he’s not over 
the top and we’re happy with him. I’m led to believe he’ll be in training next 
year. It would be a huge shame if he wasn’t. I think he’ll be better.”
 