
Richard Broke, who has died aged 70, not only produced and script-edited some 
of the most significant – and politically controversial – television dramas; he 
did so from a wheelchair, after being injured in a car crash in his 20s, and 
became a fierce campaigner for better access in public places, particularly in 
the theatre, one of his great loves.

As a young assistant stage manager, before his accident, he helped Laurence 
Olivier launch the first Chichester Festival theatre season. The stellar cast 
included Olivier himself, Joan Plowright, Michael Redgrave, Sybil Thorndike, 
André Morell, Lewis Casson, Joan Greenwood,John Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/john-neville> and Keith Michell. 
One of his treasured possessions was the 1962 programme of Uncle Vanya, signed 
by them all.
 Richard Broke, a wheelchair user since a car crash in his 20s, campaigned 
fiercely for better access in public places 
At the BBC and ITV, he went on to work with many of the best, and best-known, 
actors of the day. In 1981, for SouthernTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>, he produced Winston 
Churchill: The Wilderness Years, a landmark, eight-part serial starring Robert 
Hardy, Siân Phillips, Nigel Havers, Tim Pigott-Smith, Peter Barkworth and Eric 
Porter.

As the first executive producer of Screen One for the BBC (he told the 
Guardian it was the best job in television), he was responsible for around 50 
films over the years, culminating in Cold Comfort Farm in 1995, directed byJohn 
Schlesinger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-schlesinger>. This featured 
another star-studded cast: Eileen Atkins, Kate Beckinsale, Stephen Fry, Ian 
McKellen, Joanna Lumley, Miriam Margolyes, Freddie Jones and Rufus Sewell. The 
screenplay, from the Stella Gibbons novel, was by Malcolm Bradbury.
 Rufus Sewell and Kate Beckinsale in Cold Comfort Farm, 1995, one of around 50 
films overseen by Richard Broke as executive producer of Screen One. 
Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex Features 
With Schlesinger as director, Broke was executive producer of the 
award-winning A Question of Attribution (1991) for the BBC, from Alan Bennett's 
stage play about Anthony Blunt (played by James Fox, with Prunella Scales as 
the Queen). He was proud to have written the screenplay for James Mason's final 
film – Dr Fischer of Geneva (1985), from Graham Greene's novel – which also 
starredAlan Bates <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-bates>, Greta Scacchi 
and Barry Humphries.

But in the mid-80s, Broke became best-known ("synonymous with the word 
'controversial'," wrote the Guardian) for two productions that helped fuel the 
BBC's head-on conflict with the Thatcher government, in particular the 
Conservative party chairman Norman Tebbit, and also with the military.

The first was The Monocled Mutineer (1986), a series of plays written by Alan 
Bleasdale and starring Paul McGann as Percy Toplis, a deserter in the first 
world war. The BBC advertised the series "foolishly", wrote the director 
general,Alasdair Milne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/09/alasdair-milne>, in his memoirs, 
"as being 'a real life story', which was certainly cutting corners. The press 
fell upon us for telling lies and it added to their fury that most of the 
papers saw the plays as 'leftwing propaganda'. The fact that they were 
well-made dramas counted for nothing."

The second was Tumbledown (1988), directed by Richard Eyre, with a screenplay 
by Charles Wood, which won the Bafta award for best single drama. It starred a 
young Colin Firth as Robert Lawrence MC, a Scots Guards officer who was 
severely injured and partly paralysed during the Falklands war. His family was 
involved in the making of the film, much to the ire of the Ministry of Defence. 
The press contrasted the screening of these two productions, which questioned 
military policy, with the BBC's shelving of a "pro-Thatcher" Falklands play by 
Ian Curteis.

"I never set out to make controversial drama and I would fall flat on my face 
if I did so," Broke told an interviewer at the time. But according to friends 
he relished the controversy and loved it when the Daily Mail attacked one of 
his programmes.
 Tumbledown, a 1988 BBC drama about the Falklands war produced by Richard 
Broke, starred Colin Firth as Lt Robert Lawrence 
Born in London to a Norfolk county family with a penchant for amateur 
dramatics, he was educated at Eton, leaving at 17 to go straight into the 
theatre. His first job in 1961 was atFrank Hauser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/oct/18/guardianobituaries.obituaries1>'s 
Oxford Playhouse; his second at the Chichester Festival theatre under Olivier. 
But after a short stint in London on the Lionel Bart musical Blitz!, he decided 
the world of theatre was precarious, and joined the BBC as a trainee.

He worked on a wide range of television programmes, from the cult drama series 
Adam Adamant Lives! to a forerunner of Top of the Pops. Then, in 1970, came the 
car crash that was to leave him in a wheelchair as a paraplegic. He was driving 
up the A1 near Sandy in Bedfordshire, when he veered off the road, hit a bank 
and – this was in the days before compulsory seatbelts – suffered multiple 
trauma and broke his spine.

He was treated at Stoke Mandeville hospital, to which he would return from 
time to time over the coming years, but he rarely allowed his disability to get 
in the way of his work. He campaigned fiercely for better wheelchair access in 
theatres – not least at the newly built National Theatre, which he regarded as 
disgracefully badly equipped in its early days.

He also supported efforts to improve the portrayal of disabled people on 
television, citing Ironside, the American detective in a wheelchair played by 
Raymond Burr, as the most positive role model. "The Americans are years ahead 
of us on this," he said in 1995. "A disabled character was at the centre of a 
popular entertainment without making a great issue of it."

On his return to the BBC, he became a researcher on the Dennis Potter serial 
Casanova (1971) and was then steered into script editing, where he worked on 
Thirty-Minute Theatre and memorable series such as The Glittering Prizes 
(1976). There he began a fruitful partnership withMark Shivas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/16/television-television>, building 
up the trust of the best writers, actors and directors, with whom he would work 
when he ran Screen One.
 Winston Churchill: The Wilderness Years, 1981, produced by Richard Broke, 
featured, from left, Edward Woodward as Sir Samuel Hoare, Peter Vaughan as Sir 
Thomas Inskip, Robert Hardy as Sir Winston Churchill, Eric Porter as Neville 
Chamberlain, Peter Barkworth as Stanley Baldwin. Photograph: Ronald Grant 
Archive 
He left the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for two years, to 
dramatise Martin Gilbert's biography Winston Churchill: The Wilderness Years 
for Southern Television. "I'm still very proud of that," he said. "It was a 
landmark for me." Later he produced other dramas for ITV, including 32 episodes 
of Where the Heart Is, the highly popular series about Yorkshire district 
nurses and their families.

Broke was a stalwart supporter of Bafta, serving on its council (1992-97) and 
its TV committee (2003-09). He was also the first chair of its newly 
established interactive entertainment awards (1998).

He is survived by his wife, Elaine (nee Carew), a makeup artist who worked on 
the Monty Python and Terry Gilliam films among others, whom he married in 1989, 
and by their two daughters, Anna and Bella.

He was an active member of St Michael and All Angels Church in Chiswick, west 
London – reading the lesson, competing fiercely on quiz nights and suggesting 
fundraising ideas for a new organ. He took particular pleasure in blogging 
about a Hymnathon two years ago, when the choir and congregation sang all 542 
hymns in the New English Hymnal, right through the night. "The organ is falling 
to bits," he wrote. "In fact, we cannot know who will crack first in this 
wonderful, slightly crazy venture – the choir or the organ." A memorial service 
- accompanied by the new organ - will be held there on 1 May.

• Richard Broke, television and film producer, born 2 December 1943; died 14 
April 2014
 