
The world indoor 60m champion, Richard Kilty, has claimed there are rifts 
between Britain's top sprinters and warned it could ruin their chances of 
4x100m relay gold in theCommonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealth-games> and European 
Championships.

Kilty, who competes in the 100m at the CityGames in Manchester on Saturday 
afternoon, claims that a "clash of egos" between the two main British sprint 
groups has led to various "dramas" off the track – which he says spilled over 
at the British athletics training centre in Loughborough and at the British 
Indoor trials in Sheffield in February.

"Something happened at the UK Indoor trials," said Kilty. "There was a bit of 
tension and a few words exchanged in the mixed zone and warm-up area. And there 
was another incident a couple of months before, which I wasn't there for in 
Loughborough. I've tried to stay out of it and be as professional as I can.

"It's not friendly. I just listen to my coach and try to keep out of it. 
Whatever dramas went on, I just took a back step. Now with winning the world 
title I can't afford to be getting involved with messes like that."

Kilty is coached by Rana Reider, who also trains the British 4x100m squad at 
major championships. Reider, whom Kilty credits with turning round his career, 
is also in charge of Dwain Chambers, James Ellington andHarry Aikines-Aryeetey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harry-aikines-aryeetey>.

However, that group is said to have a frosty relationship with another group 
of sprinters trained by Barry Fudge, which includesJames Dasaolu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/james-dasaolu>, who ran 9.91sec for the 100m 
last year, and Adam Gemili, who last year in Moscow became only the second 
British athlete to break 20sec for 200m.

Kilty said: "In one group you've got me, Harry Aikines-Aryeetey and James 
Ellington, who are ranked first, second and third in the country. And then the 
other group have gotAdam Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> 
and James Dasaolu, who were the two best sprinters last year, so it's a massive 
rivalry. There were a couple of clashes of egos between the groups."

Indeed, it is rumoured in athletics circles that those clashes may even have 
become physical at the UK Indoor trials.

Usually it is events on the track that derail Britain's 4x100m squad. Seven 
times in the past five years they have failed to get the baton round in 
accordance with track and field's rules and regulations – and at last year's 
world championships they had a bronze medal stripped from them for an 
infringement on the second exchange between Aikines-Areetey to Ellington. Now, 
though, the alleged disagreements off it threaten to prove just as damaging.

The squad will get together for World Relays in the Bahamas next week without 
Dasaolu, who is recovering from a thigh injury, and Gemili, who is taking his 
exams. But Kilty, who gets on well with athletes from both groups, has called 
on everyone to set aside any differences that they may have.

"I know James is injured and Adam has got commitments to his education but 
hopefully for the Commonwealths and Europeans we can come together and be a 
really dominant team," he said. "That's the best option for everyone – for 
everyone to swallow their pride and be professional.

"I know Adam definitely would like to be in the relay team and I know James 
declared he wanted to run for Nigeria at one point. But Adam is definitely 
interested. I'd love Adam and James to come into the relay squad because I know 
it would be a real success.

"We can smash the British record and challenge the Jamaicans and the Americans 
with that squad – as long as we can work together."
 