
In the early 1970s, a group of women gathered to discuss the budget for their 
new theatre company - or rather, the lack of it. As recorded in Ros Franey's 
1973 essay "Plays and Players", there was no provision for the company's stage 
management to be paid. "I do it because I want to," one woman said earnestly. 
"It's just there's not much left over from the dole." Someone suggested 
redistributing the money allotted to writers. "If we had any bits of old 
jewellery . . ." someone else remarked. "Yes, yes, flog our jewels!"

These bejewelled women became The Women's Theatre Group, aka Sphinx Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company. And in this mini-scene is 
the essence of a movement, driven by the impulse to jettison the past, its 
confining roles, in the service of a whole new future.

This autumn the National Theatre will host Sphinx's Flogging the Jewels, an 
exhibition celebrating 30 years of its existence and recognising a unique 
theatrical history. It's a timely show: at present, women artistic directors 
are less well represented in British theatres than at any point in the past 20 
years. Moreover, last year there were 218 new plays staged in Britain - only 38 
by women. In the light of these statistics, did women's companies make a 
difference?

Emerging alongside the women's liberation movement, Sphinx began life in 1973 
with a more trenchant name: the Women's Theatre Group, an unmistakable 
declaration of independence. The WTG insisted on the right of women to produce 
their own work and pointed out that theatre up to then had in some sense 
"disappeared" women, representing their lives in ways that often seemed to be 
little more than a white male fantasy.

Women were hungry for a theatre in which they could see the reality of their 
lives represented, and this new enterprise was a daring, exhilarating wresting 
of our own bodies and labours from their purposes to ours. There would be no 
more Alisons mutely suffering in Look Back in Anger, providing a foil for a 
brutal male eloquence. Instead she would push aside the ironing board, round on 
the audience and demand to know why no one had ever told her what a clitoris 
was.

Looking through the WTG company scrapbooks - homely affairs, with yellowing 
reviews - you get a whiff of the headiness of the enterprise: of commitment, 
invention and sheer liberation. This was theatre with a bold political agenda: 
to rewrite history; to challenge patriarchal power; to explore sexuality from a 
woman's viewpoint; to make drama of women's lives, so often portrayed as 
insignificant and irrelevant; to investigate the nature of being a female 
artist; to challenge the literary canon.

Inspired and commissioned by groups such as WTG, a generation of women writers 
emerged: Claire McIntyre, Winsome Pinnock, Bryony Lavery, Charlotte Keatley, 
Timberlake Wertenbaker. From WTG itself there was Pam Gem's Das, Stusa, Fish 
and Vi, Deborah Levy's Pax and Elaine Feinstein's Lear's Daughters. Over at 
Monstrous Regiment, a writer called Caryl Churchill wrote Vinegar Tom, about 
the 17th-century persecution of witches.

It now seems impossible to imagine a theatre landscape without these people. 
They changed the way women wrote and the things they felt they could write 
about. Actresses who suffered a huge disparity in casting now had work in which 
they figured large. The list of female designers and directors who passed 
through the company is impressive.

By the early 1990s, however, WTG was at a crossroads. Sue Parish was appointed 
artistic director and the company was renamed Sphinx. Was this a reflection of 
a new complexity or a disguise of its embarrassing political roots? Lads' plays 
hit the London stages: Jez Butterworth's Mojo, Nick Grosso's Peaches, Simon 
Block's Not a Game for Boys. "Bums on seats" became the prevalent theatrical 
catchphrase. Politics, after a decade of right-wing assault on social and 
democratic institutions, became unfashionable. Issues, one of the motivating 
forces for the emergence of women's theatre, became a turn-off. Audiences - 
quite rightly, in many ways - wanted art. Or maybe they didn't want to be 
reminded that the left had lost.

Truth be told, women's theatre had become passé. It was around this time that 
I wrote Playhouse Creatures for Sphinx, based on the experiences of the first 
English actresses. Even then it felt like writing against the grain of the 
times.

By the mid-1990s a whole new phenomenon, "In Yer Face" theatre, began to 
emerge. Angry at the failure of politics, this "group" - aka the new brutalists 
- were evenly weighted between men and women: Mark Ravenhill, Patrick Marber, 
Sarah Kane, Rebecca Pritchard, Judy Upton. Kane's Blasted, which rocked our 
stages in 1995, contained extraordinarily iconoclastic, searing writing and 
was, of course, damned by the (male) critics. (The surprise came later, with 
their hasty retractions.)

One lasting innovation Parish introduced was a series of conferences called 
The Glass Ceiling. This year's discussion was held at London's Soho Theatre, 
with a panel including the theatre directors Annabel Arden and Katie Mitchell, 
and the novelist Gillian Slovo, discussing the nature and practice of 
collaboration. These events are always packed and vital, which, I'm ashamed to 
admit, continues to surprise me. Do women still have such a strong need to talk 
and listen to each other? Have they really anything to offer each other that 
cannot be got in mainstream culture?

A company such as Sphinx should be aiming at its own obsolescence, a day when 
to be separate in order to have a voice becomes redundant. But while the 
central bastions of theatrical power radically underrepresent women, black and 
white, that day is still in the future. At a time when theatre seems to be 
re-embracing the political - with the recent success of plays such as 
Guantánamo, The Permanent Way, Stuff Happens and Talking to Terrorists - and 
encountering the political in a new way, with the likes of Behzti and Jerry 
Springer: The Opera, it might be timely to reconnect with the radical energies 
of 30 years ago.

· Flogging the Jewels! is at the National Theatre, London SE1, until November 
5. Details: 020-7452 3000.
 