
The number of scientific procedures involving animals conducted in 2015 rose 
slightly to 4.14m, compared with 4.12m in 2013. Around half of those were 
experimental procedures, of which 123,000 were classed as “severe”, according 
to officialHome Office figures released today. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/statistics-of-scientific-procedures-on-living-animals-great-britain-2015>

By far the most common animals used by researchers were mice, with 3.04 
million procedures completed. The overall numbers represent a 0.5% rise on 
2013, the most relevant year for comparison.

While the proportion of primates involved in experimental procedures remains 
low at 0.2%, the numbers show a 12% rise in procedures carried out on primates 
since 2013.

Drugs research hampered by substandard animal testing procedures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/13/drugs-research-hampered-by-substandard-animal-testing-procedures>
“The great majority of these tests are regulatory tests,” said Roger Lemon, 
professor of neurophysiology at University College London. “These are tests 
that need to be carried out on new drugs, new procedures, before they can be 
used in human patients.”

Of the procedures involving primates less than 1% were deemed to be severe, 
with more than 98% judged to be either mild - meaning minor, short-lived pain 
or suffering - or moderate, a surgical procedure, for example .

“I think the general public will be reassured by the fact that in the case of 
the use of primates in research in Britain, the great majority of these 
experiments are in the mild and moderate categories [of severity],” said Lemon.

Half of all procedures recorded involved the breeding or creation of 
genetically modified animals; half were experiments. Procedures on rats made up 
268,522 of the total, with 561,424 using fish and 3,612 using primates.

The RSPCA said more should be done to reduce the number of animals used in 
research.


“The RSPCA strongly believe that these animals deserve better, and much more 
could be done in practice to challenge animal use, reduce suffering and improve 
welfare,” said Dr Penny Hawkins, head of the research animals team at the 
RSPCA. “There has certainly been progress in recent years towards replacing 
laboratory animals and reducing their suffering, but the pace of change is far 
too slow for the millions who are still used every year.”

Scientists told to stop wasting animal lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/18/animal-lives-wasted-in-drugs-safety-tests>


This was the second year in which data was collected for completed procedures, 
as opposed to procedures that have started, following the introduction of a new 
UK law based on a European directive.


Despite 2015 being the second year for which the data was recorded in this 
way, the statisticians warn that comparison to 2014 figures is difficult due to 
issues with under-reporting in 2014.

Besides recording the number of procedures completed, the approach also 
records the maximum severity experienced by each animal, ranging from 
“sub-threshold”, in which the procedure caused less discomfort that having a 
needle inserted, to “severe” - judged as “a major departure from the animal’s 
usual state of health and wellbeing”.

While 6% of experimental procedures were judged to be severe, 24% were deemed 
moderate, with nearly half of the experimental procedures assessed as mild.

As well as being useful to inspectors, such information is expected to have 
wider effects. “I think it is a very helpful demonstration of openness and 
transparency to the public about the severity that animals actually undergo,” 
said Sue Houlton, Chief Inspector of the Animals in Science Regulation Unit 
(ASRU).

Houlton also revealed that the recent political events have caused disruption, 
with the release of the annual report from the ASRU delayed until after the 
summer. “I think you might appreciate that these have been rather extraordinary 
times in government and we are not currently in a position to publish that,” 
said Houlton.

While standards of animal research are unlikely to be affected by Brexit, some 
are concerned that reduced funding and other ramifications could trigger 
decrease in animal research.

“One of the big factors is the European Medicines Agency - whether they choose 
to stay in London or whether they relocate,” said Sarah Bailey, a 
pharmacologist from the University of Bath. “The knock-on consequences perhaps 
for drug companies and drug development in the UK could be potentially serious.”
 