
A crispy rasher of bacon is becoming an increasingly costly indulgence in the 
US, where a surging appetite for pigmeat and cutbacks in farmers' swine herds 
have pushed the price of pork cuts to an all-time high.

On the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the cost of pork bellies, which are used 
to produce bacon, has risen by more than 65% in the last 12 months and the 
wholesale price of pig producthit $1.35 per pound last week 
<http://www.businessweek.com/news/2010-07-29/hog-futures-jump-as-u-s-bacon-demand-increases-cattle-decline.html>
 – its highest on record.

Analysts say farmers reducing pig herds during the recession, together with 
swine flu and high feed prices, took their toll. Meanwhile, demand is on the up 
as consumers trade down to bacon from more expensive meats, while seasonal use 
reaches a summer peak.

"The supply of slaughter hogs in the US is much lower than a year ago," says 
Chip Whalen, a risk manager at Commodity & Ingredient Hedging, a consultancy in 
Chicago. "There's a lot of additional usage of bacon – the BLT is very popular 
at this time of year and a lot of restaurants feature bacon on their menus in 
salads and sandwiches."

The surging commodity price has found its way into US supermarkets. The Bureau 
of Labour Statistics <http://www.bls.gov/> reported last month that retail 
prices for sliced bacon reached a 30-year high of $4.04 per pound in US cities 
in June, an increase of 18 cents on the previous month.

British bacon fans are feeling less of a squeeze. Most British pork is either 
domestically produced or imported from Denmark.BPEX <http://www.bpex.org.uk/>, 
which tracks the pork market in Britain, said prices had been rising this 
summer but were still below last year's peak. In the four weeks to 16 May, 
British consumers spent £93m on bacon, up 9% year-on-year.

"We're really a beef and poultry consumer market. But during the recession, as 
the economic downturn has gone on, people have substituted to pigmeat and pork 
products," said James Park, a senior analyst at BPEX. "A lot has been done in 
the media on how versatile pork is, how it can be used as an alternative for 
pricier cuts."

Traditionally seen as a stalwart of thrifty cookery, bacon has changed in use 
over the years and is increasingly seen as a way to add a little zest to 
burgers and lunchtime dishes. But in the US, pig farmers suffered two 
consecutive years of losses as grain rocketed in cost and swine flu took hold – 
causing a dip in consumer demand despite no scientific risk of human contagion, 
plus a ban on US pork exports to China.

"We've had some producers go out of business," said Dave Warner, a spokesman 
for theUS National Pork Producers' Council <http://www.nppc.org/> who welcomed 
the recent upturn in demand. "Maybe we're getting word out that a lot of cuts 
of pork are lean, healthy and nutritious."

Bacon remains a culturally sensitive issue, with pork meats shunned by certain 
religious faiths. Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for theCouncil on 
Islamic-American Relations <http://www.cair.com/>, chose carefully when asked 
his reaction to rocketing bacon prices: "It's the kind of thing where if we say 
'yeah, it's good news', people will say that Muslims want others to suffer, so 
I'm not going to go down that road."
 