
Laura Robson was hoping to get a couple of tickets for the men's final. She 
had already chatted with Serena Williams in the week, had a penned birthday 
message from Marat Safin – she was 15 years old the previous week – and after 
losing theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
junior final protected herself from the air conditioning with an oversized 
jumper she had borrowed from Spain's Fernando Verdasco who, just 12 hours 
before she played the final in the Rod Laver Arena, had lost there to Rafael 
Nadal in the semi-final.

"Because I just spent an obscene amount of time in the anti-doping room after 
my final, and I didn't have a jumper, I went in the cafe and asked Fernando and 
he gave me this one," said Robson, who met the Spaniard in Amsterdam last year 
when she was in the Netherlands training.

Robson was beaten 6-3 6-1 by Russia's Ksenia Pervak, who is already ranked 
just outside the world's top 150 on the WTA Tour, and will be 18 in May. It was 
instantly clear her opponent was both physically more mature, with a greater 
capacity to chase down shots in a rally. There was an explosive quality to her 
running that the British junior still lacks, as you would expect of one so 
young, though she quickly demurred when it was suggested the Russian hit the 
ball harder.

"I think generally she won because she played more consistently than me. So 
it's definitely disappointing to lose, but I thought I played as well as I 
could have."

As had happened in some of her early matches Robson began a little slowly and 
went 3-0 down, losing her serve twice. She then broke back, and held for 3-2, 
at which point many in the 400 or so crowd were expecting her to turn matters 
around completely as she had when winning the Wimbledon junior title.

However, on this occasion the more experienced Russian maintained her grip and 
Robson's best weapon, the serve, let her down. Altogether she only managed to 
hold it twice, while her forehand also fragmented in the second set as fatigue 
set in.

"Not as much as the semi-final, I think I upped my dosage of jelly snakes," 
she said, grinning, though the brutally hot weather during the previous rounds 
had undoubtedly taken their toll.

Robson will leave for home on Monday and sort out her schedule for the rest of 
the year when it seems certain she will receive a wild-card entry into the 
Wimbledon main draw. "I've no say in it, really. I've got the wild-card for 
quallies, but it's their decision whether they want to give me a main draw one. 
I would like one."

Off court, Robson remains very much the young teenager, immensely enjoying 
rubbing shoulders with the top players. On court her composure, and the timing 
of her shots, are mature beyond her years, and bode well for the future, even 
if the transition from junior to professional is a path strewn with sharp rocks 
and hidden obstacles.

"Obviously I wanted to win but getting to the final was a really big 
achievement for me, especially overcoming the all the hot weather."

There were moments of frustration when she pinged her racket on the court, and 
uttered a few choice words to herself. "I'll try to be a bit quieter next 
time," she smiled knowingly. All in all it was a good fortnight for Britain's 
women, though Robson baulked when asked by an American if she could be part of 
a revival.

"Well, it's not really a revival, because Anne [Keothavong] is already top 50. 
I don't like that question." But she was only being playful.

By comparison, Russian women's tennis is immensely strong. There are five in 
the current WTA Tour top 10, and seven in the top 20, while in the junior 
rankings they have 10 in the top 100, excluding Pervak who did not play any 
junior tennis last year, competing at a higher level. She has a current WTA 
ranking of No 154, and before the junior event tried to qualify for the main 
draw.

"I knew that I was the best here, but it was a little bit hard to keep my 
nerve. You know you are the best, but also worry that you might get sick or 
have some injury problems," said Pervak, who often practices with Anna 
Chakvetadze, the former Russian world No5, who knocked out Keothavong here in 
the first round. Pervak was asked what she thought of Robson. She turned down 
her mouth and shrugged.

"I think she's ok, but I was better, so what can I say?" It was hardly a 
ringing endorsement, but then you would not expect it. The Russian knows that 
Robson is being talked about in the locker rooms as a future star of the game, 
and she was not about to add to her growing reputation.
 