
Britain's Laura Robson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-robson> hopes 
her efforts in Melbourne over the past two weeks will be enough to get a 
wildcard entry into the main women's draw at Wimbledon.

The 15-year-old, who won the Wimbledon girls' title last year, lost 6–3, 6–1 
to Russia's Ksenia Pervak in theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> junior girls' singles final 
in the Rod Laver Arena on Saturday.

"It's up to them. I've got no say in it, really," she said of her chances of 
getting into the main event atWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>. "I've got the wildcard for 
qualifying but it's their decision whether they want to give me a main draw 
one. I would like one."

Robson lost the Melbourne final against an older and much more experienced 
opponent – Pervak, 18, is ranked 154 on the WTA tour. But Robson said there 
were positives to take from her time in Melbourne.

"Well, I've learned about dealing with the extreme conditions and also letting 
go a bit more if I don't do so well at the start of the second set," she said.

There had also been the highlight of playing in the Rod Laver Arena. "There 
weren't as many people in there as Court One [at Wimbledon], but it was still 
really nice – and I finally got my [players'] towels," Robson said.

One of the perks of playing on a show court, using the Hawk-Eye computer 
system, passed her by. "The only thing I was actually a bit upset about is I 
didn't get to challenge anything," she said. "That was really annoying. She 
challenged twice, and then I didn't get any."

The Australian Open women's champion, Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>, has set her sights set on 
another "Serena Slam" following her demolition of Dinara Safina in Melbourne. 
Williams thrashed the Russian 6–0, 6–3 in 59 minutes on Saturday night to win a 
fourth Australian Open title, her 10th grand slam overall, and reclaim the No1 
spot in the rankings.

The 27-year-old American is now halfway towards repeating her slam of 2002-03, 
when she last held all four grand slam titles at once, having won the US Open 
in New York last September.

"The Serena Slam is something I'd like to do again," Williams said. "It would 
be great to win more than one, more than two grand slams this year, more than 
three. That would be awesome."

Next is the French Open, which starts in Paris on 25 May. "Obviously my sights 
are on doing well in Paris," Williams said. "I didn't do well at all last year. 
So when I get there I won't have that much to lose and I'll just be really 
relaxed."

Billie Jean King, Chris Evert, Helen Wills Moody, Steffi Graf and Margaret 
Court are the other women's players who have won 10 or more grand slams.

Williams also won the women's doubles at Melbourne Park with her sister, Venus.
 