
Britain's Laura Robson reached the quarter-finals of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> juniors with a 6-4,6-2 
victory over Silvia Njiric of Croatia, with Heather Watson, who defeated 
Japan's Miyabi Inoue 7-6(1), 4-6,6-4, joining her in the last eight as Victoria 
sweltered and smoked, with bush fires breaking out close to the city.

The tournament's extreme heat policy, with the temperature swooping beyond 
40C, was invoked during the afternoon, and both roofs closed on the two main 
show courts. Meanwhile play stopped on the outside courts, although Watson's 
match was still going on at the time of the decision, and she had to complete 
it in such intense heat that her cold drinks became hot between games.

"It was so, so hot," said Watson. "Thank god I came out on top. I've never 
played in such high temperatures. Straight afterwards I got into the shower, 
ate, and then had an ice bath. I can't play in a hat or a visor because I feel 
I can't see everywhere. Even by the second set I was feeling dizzy."

At one point she leaned on her racket because her feet had become so hot that 
they hurt. "I was never going to give up. I really wanted to win. You learn so 
much. It's all about preparation, and making sure you have had enough to drink. 
It feels great that I did everything and came out on top."

Watson, 16, played in two junior slams last year, losing in the first round at 
Wimbledon when Robson won the title as a 14-year-old, and then reaching the 
second round at the US Open. "We are both trying really hard to get the best 
out of our games, and it's fun. We push each other along and get on really 
well. She watched my match and I watched a bit of hers, but I was trying not to 
stay out in the heat before my match."

"I felt really sorry for Heather in that heat," said Robson, the No 5 seed. "I 
found it easier to cope when I was playing rather than sitting down when you 
just get hit by a wave of heat. I drank about 12 bottles." Like Watson she also 
had an ice bath. "I don't enjoy that," she grinned.
 