
Britain's Laura Robson was beaten in the junior final of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, losing 6-3, 6-1 against 
Ksenia Pervak, who is far more experienced at this level and nearly three years 
older. Robson had admitted to feeling short of energy during her semi-final and 
her game fell away sharply in the second set.

Robson, who won last year's junior Wimbledon title, only managed to hold 
serve, normally her great strength, twice throughout the match against her 
fellow left-hander, while her forehand also let her down under pressure. The 
Russian is already ranked inside the world top 200 on the WTA Tour, and has 
been playing the majority of her tennis at the more advanced level for the last 
two years.

She was physically stronger than Robson, chasing down on both the forehand and 
backhand side, and rarely allowing the British player, who only turned 
15-years-old last week, the time to compose herself. Robson had frequently 
fought back when down during the week, though on this occasion there was 
clearly nothing left after a first set that took 46 minutes.

This was the first time she had played in the Rod Laver Arena, the match 
taking place just 12 hours after two other left-handers, Rafael Nadal and 
Fernando Gonzalez, had finished an epic men's semi-final at 1.10am local time. 
Around 400 returned to watch the girls' final.

Robson was quickly in trouble, and bounced her racket on the court as she went 
3-0 down. There were signs of a recovery in the fourth game when she broke 
back, and then began to serve much better against the 17-year-old Russian, 
seeded No3, two places higher than Robson.

The roof was open and the temperatures relatively cool compared to the 
previous three days, though any hope of a Robson recovery were quickly 
dispelled when she went 4-0 down in the second set. The Russian's level did not 
drop and although Robson hit some memorable winners she was never able to 
sustain this excellence against her older and more experienced opponent.
 