
So, Aldershot does not have the glitter of Los Angeles, or the rock'n'roll 
heritage of Liverpool and London.

What it does have going for it, as far as the rock band Ash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash> were concerned tonight was that its 
name begins with A, making it a perfect location for the first gig of an 
eccentric A-Z tour of Britain.

Though the band has sold millions of albums worldwide and can fill big venues 
in much larger towns, it has decided to spend the next month or so 
criss-crossing the country in alphabetical order, playing more obscure halls 
and clubs.

After leaving Aldershot in Hampshire, the three-piece group will head for 
Bradford, more than 200 miles away. Then it's on to Carlisle, Dundee, and so on.

The band will conclude with gigs at Ventnor on the Isle of Wight, followed by 
Worcester, Exmouth for the troublesome X (a slight cheat), Yeovil and on the 
final night Zennor, a remote parish near St Ives in Cornwall, where a sell-out 
crowd (of about 75) will pack the village hall.

There are some big old treks: after playing Falkirk, for instance, the band 
will face a 350-mile trip to Gloucester. Oldham to Plymouth (just under 300 
miles) doesn't sound much fun and Rotherham to Swansea (more than 200 miles) 
probably won't be a bundle of laughs either.

The tour is the band's attempt to reach different audiences in different ways. 
It is not promoting an album. Instead the tour ties in with the release of the 
first of 26 individual songs that will be available one every two weeks for the 
next 12 months.

Bass player Mark Hamilton said the opportunity to try something different came 
after the band's deal with a major record company ended.

They had produced six "conventional" albums but decided to do something new. 
They set up their own independent label, aiming to keep new songs, rather than 
albums, coming out.

"Most people now download individual songs rather than buying albums," said 
Hamilton. "We wanted to put the focus on the individual track but make them 
very regular." The tracks are available by subscription, on vinyl and in 
digital format. The first, True Love 1980, has been released and is selling 
well.

"You have to keep the quality up. Every song's a single so they'll be 
scrutinised much more. You can't have album fillers," said Hamilton.

They have enough songs recorded in their New York studio ready to go. "But if 
we come up with a song tomorrow that we like we can record it and it can be 
inserted into the schedule," said Hamilton. "We can be much more spontaneous."

The logistics of the tour, though, have been a nightmare for Ash's agent and 
manager, Tav. Finding a place beginning with A was not a problem but the 
challenge came when they had to find a venue beginning with B that was free and 
was within striking distance of band and bus.

Tav said: "For a while it looked as if the X problem might have been 
insurmountable until a bright spark came up with Exmouth. They had more options 
for Z but plumped for Zennor. The population is something like 200. It should 
be interesting. As long as we can get the bus down the lanes."
 