
Andy Roddick has more reasons than most, 15 of them to be precise, to rue the 
career ofRoger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>. The 
two first played each other way back in 2001, and it only took the American 
another four matches to beat the Swiss. He may have felt he had cracked it, and 
that life was sweet. Little could he have comprehended that it would be another 
five years, and 11 successive defeats, before he won for a second time in Miami 
last year.

Small wonder that Roddick is steeped in admiration for the Swiss, whom he will 
meet in the semi-finals in Melbourne: "I was really happy to see Roger win the 
US Open last year. He has nothing to prove. He's the greatest. The guy made two 
finals, a semi-final, and won a slam last year and people were saying he's off 
form. I think he deserves a lot more respect than that."

Federer did not get on court until after 10pm here on Tuesday, but was off it 
in only 1hr 20min, defeating a hapless Juan Martin del Potro of Argentina, the 
No8 seed, 6-3, 6-0, 6-0 and reeling off 13 successive winning games: "Andy and 
I have had some big matches and it's always a pleasure to play against him. 
Sometimes people don't give him enough credit." A mutual admiration society, 
though little is shared about the outcome of their matches: 15-2 to Federer, 
who is now two victories away from equalling Pete Sampras's all-time record of 
14 grand slam victories.

An upbeat Federer also felt his match against Del Potro exceeded his 
expectations. "Things went much better than I expected," said the world No2. "I 
was really happy the way I came out and played. I kind of felt good from the 
start. The longer the match went, the more he struggled and the better I got."

Roddick is currently attempting to re-invent himself under the guidance of 
Larry Stefanki, a one-time coach to Tim Henman. Significantly he has persuaded 
the former US Open champion to lose weight, which has enabled him to move a 
little quicker, as he will have to do against Federer if he is to stand any 
chance of a third victory in their 18th encounter.

Roddick reached the semi-finals here for a fourth time, and his ninth in all 
slams, when the reigning champion, Serbia's Novak Djokovic, quit when 
6-7,6-4,6-2, 2-1 down. Djokovic has now retired four times in a slam since 
2005, which might seem to point to a considerable flaw in his character had he 
not had such considerable success. Only time will tell if he has the mental and 
physical fortitude to challenge for further slam titles, and continue to hound 
Nadal and Federer at the top. Or whetherAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> will slip past him.

Djokovic has been ranked No3 for all but one week since July 2007, and three 
times has been within one victory of being No2. Murray, having lost in the 
fourth round againstSpain's Fernando Verdasco, may have to wait until the clay 
court season to mount his next ranking challenge on the Serb as he looks to 
become the highest ranked British male player in the Open era at No3. Both 
Henman and Greg Rusedski stuck at No4.

The last Murray standing, Jamie, went out in the second round of the mixed 
doubles when he and his partner, Liezel Huber, the fourth seeds, were beaten 
6-7, 6-2, 10-4 by Andy Ram and Nathalie Dechy. It ended a disappointing 
tournament for the Murray bothers, Jamie having lost in the first round of the 
men's doubles last week.However he was sympathetic towards Andy: "It was 
obviously a tough loss for him but I don't think it's something he'll take 
months and months to get over. I don't think he was necessarily feeling the 
greatest. He'd been a bit banged up with his throat and stuff. I don't think he 
was feeling 100%. That's not to say it was the reason why he lost the match but 
maybe it's a reason why he didn't perform as well as he would have liked."

Jelena Dokic's extraordinary run came to end when she was beaten 6-4,4-6,6-4 
by Dinara Safina, the No3 seed, setting up an all-Russian semi-final against 
Vera Zvonareva who beat France's Marion Bartoli 6-3, 6-0. The return of Dokic, 
whose last slam appearance was in 2006, has tugged at the heart-strings of 
Australians, who hadpreviously watched bewildered at her struggles with her 
over-bearing father, Damir, and then with the tennis authorities.

There can be no certainty what will happen next to the 25-year-old 
Serbian-born Dokic, though this has surely been a cathartic few days for the 
former world No 4. "I think a lot of things still have not sunk in," she said, 
having entered theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> as a wild card. "I've shown 
I can play with some of the best girls in the world. Now I have to try not to 
have too many ups and downs."

She was speaking about her tennis. The same applies to her life.
 