
Andy Murray will face Roger Federer in Sunday's Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final after the world No1 
swatted aside Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in straight sets in today's semi-final.

The match-up is a repeat of the 2008 US Open final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/sep/09/usopentennis.andymurray>, 
Murray's only previous grand-slam final appearance, which Federer won with some 
ease. Murray, though, has a winning record against Federer, with victories in 
six of their 10 meetings. Federer, however, has won their last two matches. The 
match will be Federer's eighth successive grand slam final, the 18th of the 
last 19, and the 22nd of his career.

"I know that he'd like to win the first title in British tennis in, what is it 
150,000 years?" said Federer with a smile. "It would be so nice for him. He's a 
nice guy. I will have to be aggressive. We've had some different types of 
matches against each other. We sometimes like to jerk around on the court and 
play some high balls at each other. Definitely it will be tactical. It is 
always a tactical game against him."

The Swiss player was certainly in ominous form against Tsonga, the No10 seed, 
winning 6-2, 6-3, 6-2 to take him one step closer to a 16th grand slam title. 
The three-times Australian Open champion took under 90 minutes to race past his 
French opponent. The first set took just 30 minutes, the second 31 and the 
victory was sealed on his second match point, wrapping up the third and final 
set in 27 minutes.

Federer, who dominated on his serve conceding just 15 points in his 13 games, 
made 33 winners and just 13 unforced errors and was imperious from the net and 
the baseline. Tsonga, the beaten finalist in Melbourne in 2009, failed to reach 
the levels achieved in his quarter-final victory over Novak Djokovic, throwing 
in five double faults. "It's nice going through a match like that," said 
Federer.

The No1 seed broke his opponent in the fourth game of the match and broke once 
more in the eighth to take the first set. The solitary break in the second set 
came in the sixth game and he was broken in the third and fifth games of the 
final set. Federer converted five of his 10 break points. Tsonga did not 
managed to earn one.

"It is always difficult to play top players, sometimes it plays out the way 
you want it to and sometimes you have to work a lot harder," said Federer. "It 
was just so important to win that first set and get that good start. I thought 
it was quite intense early but maybe he was more fatigued mentally than 
physically, I think that showed near the end."
 