
Here we go again So then, here it is: Federer v Nadal XXVII, the 27th 
instalment of the greatest tennis rivalry of my lifetime. Possibly of any 
lifetime, though I don't don't doubt that many who witnessed Borg-McEnroe at 
its peak might disagree. It's a conversation that only ever ends with everyone 
grumpily conceding that you can't make fair comparisons across such different 
eras. Still fun though.

Perhaps this match-up no longer has the allure it once did. Perhaps this is no 
longer truly a two-way rivalry, but one that also includes Novak Djokovic, the 
reigning world No1, the man who has now ripped Federer's guts out in two 
successive US Opens - denying us the chance to see the Swiss contest a final 
with Nadal on both occasions.

Yet somehow this match-up still feels special. Perhaps it's the clash of 
styles – Federer's classical elegance against Nadal's muscular aggression. Or 
perhaps it's just a question of timing – the way Nadal's rise coincided with 
the exact moment in which Federer was steaming towards every grand slam record 
going.

Who knows? What we do know is that Nadal has won 17 of the 26 meetings to 
date, and that since 2008 this series has become increasingly lopsided, with 
the Spaniard winning nine of 12. But if Federer needed encouragement, he might 
take it from the fact that he prevailed at their last meeting, winning 6-3, 6-0 
at the World Tour Finals in London last year.

Can he repeat such a performance here? It'll be fun finding out.

Or is it simply Federer v Nadal X? Typical of these two to be setting records 
before they even start. "Ten #grandslam encounters between 2 players equal the 
Open era record for most frequent matchup," tweets the@Infostrada2012 
<https://twitter.com/#!/Infostrada2012> account. "Federer v Nadal. McEnroe v 
Lendl #ausopen"

They're knocking up Federer in red shirt and white shorts, Nadal in pea green 
with smartly co-ordinated blue headband, sweatbands and trainers. Man presently 
obstructing Eurosport cameras in yellow shirt and black Sam Allardyce-inspired 
headset.

Path to the semi-final Federer is yet to drop a set so far, cruising to this 
point in impressive form – most notably during his quarter-final rout of Juan 
Martin Del Potro. Nadal himself has only dropped a single set, against Berdych 
in the last round, but there is a sense that he is perhaps just a shade below 
his blistering best. A lot of people, including our lead Eurosport commentator, 
seem to be backing Federer to triumph. Which would be some going since he 
hasn't done so against Nadal at a grand slam since Wimbledon 2007.

First set: Federer 1-0 Nadal*: "How can Federer ever beat two of Nadal, 
Djokovic and Murray to win a Slam?" asks Gary Naylor. "He knows that he can't 
outlast them in rallies nor in matches, so he has to hit line after line to 
finish points, games and sets off without getting into attritional battles, 
He's 30, has hardly had a break form the game in a decade and hasn't won a Slam 
for two years. It's not denying his genius to claim that he's not going to win 
another big one, it's a testament to his genius that he still makes so many 
semis and finals." Well, playing like he did in that first game would certainly 
be a start. A hold to love completed in less than a minute, complete with an 
ace and even a little serve and volley on the final point.

First set: Federer* 2-0 Nadal: Wow - a stark contrast between Federer's 
opening service game and that of his opponent, Nadal slipping to 15-30 as he 
drives a backhand into the net, pinned to the back of the court by a series of 
deep forehands. Federer then misses a huge opportunity on the next point, 
failing to put away an overhead volley and allowing Nadal back into the point. 
But after forcing deuce, Federer takes his first break-point with a blistering 
inside-out backhand pass. Woof.

First set: Federer 3-0 Nadal*: Nadal does at least play himself into a couple 
of points on Federer's second service, but it's still an easy hold – the 
Spaniard failing to dig a volley out from beneath the net cord on 40-15. "Rafa 
was sick as a dog for that final where he was thrashed," tweets@ol_haILL 
<https://twitter.com/#!/ol_haILL>, referencing the defeat in London. A fair 
point, but is he even now in particularly rude health? Certainly Federer looks 
a lot fresher.

First set: Federer* 3-1 Nadal: Federer has done a lot of work on his backhand 
return over the last two years, and it shows – the Swiss driving serves right 
back onto Nadal's toes at the baseline. Nadal secures a much-needed hold as 
Federer swishes a backhand into the tramlines from the back of the court, but 
he certainly had to work for it.

First set: Federer 4-1 Nadal*: Even after dropping the first point of his next 
service game, Federer does not flinch. He is dominating the rallies so far, 
keeping the ball away from Nadal's powerful backhand and just picking his 
opponent apart. He closes another hold to 15 with a beautiful forehand pass 
from the back of the court.

First set: Federer* 4-2 Nadal: It is reflective of their their respective 
natures, of course, but the difference in body language right now is just huge. 
Nadal is pounding the court, trying to physically battle his way back into the 
match. Federer glides across the back of the court looking utterly effortless - 
clipping a sumptuous backhand lob over his opponent after Nadal storms the net. 
The Spaniard does hold again, though, kissing the inside tramline with his 
serve at 40-30 for his first ace of the match.

First set: Federer 4-3 Nadal*: "It's amazing how quickly he gets into 
Federer's head," opines our Eurosport commentator, and he's dead right – the 
Swiss suffering a critical loss of nerve at 30-30, thrusting a forehand wide 
and then rushing the net prematurely on break point. Nadal takes advantage with 
a stinging forehand pass.

First set: Federer* 4-4 Nadal: Oh my, Federer really has lost his rhythm again 
here, slapping a few truly ragged shots way out of the court. Nadal's easiest 
hold by some stretch. "There's far too much love between the 2 lads," complains 
Anthony O'Connell. "It's all, 'you're great', 'no, you're great', 'no, you're 
brilliant' etc. In the 80s they just wanted to kill each other. Although I see 
Roger heading back to the batcave after a defeat and hanging upside down for a 
couple of days plotting the downfall of everyone on tour!"

First set: Federer 5-4 Nadal*: Federer gets back on track with a love hold, 
closing out with an ace that is initially called out before our American umpire 
overturns the call. No objections from Nadal, who must now serve to stay in the 
set.

8.08am: European markets have got off to a good start again: the FTSE 100 
index in London is 19 points ahead at 5742, a 0.3% gain. France's CAC, Spain's 
Ibex and Italy's FTSE MIB are all up 0.7% while Germany's Dax has climbed 0.6%.

First set: Federer 6-5 Nadal*: Federer holds to 15, with the help of his third 
ace of the match so far. And here's a little statistical nugget that may give 
him added incentive here at the business end of this first set. "Nadal is 133-1 
in Slam matches in which he wins 1st set and 15-19 in Slam matches in which he 
does not," tweets@Infostrada2012 <https://twitter.com/#!/Infostrada2012>.

First set: Federer* 6-6 Nadal: Perhaps aware of the importance of this first 
set to his chances, Federer throws everything he has at this last game fo the 
set, racing in to the net to reach a Nadal dropshot which had looked well out 
of reach. Unfortunately, all he can do is flip the ball back into the middle of 
the court, from which Nadal dispatches it straight back past him. Nadal holds 
to 15. Here comes the tie-break.

First set tie-break: Federer 1-0 Nadal*: Nadal clips a two-handed backhand 
long from the back of the court.

First set tie-break: Federer* 2-1 Nadal: A mini-break for the Swiss, who 
punches the ball straight back to Nadal on a backhand return with a shortened 
swing, putting the ball right on the Spaniard's toes once again, and forcing 
him into an awkward half-volley that flies wide. Nadal takes the next point, 
though.

First set tie-break: Federer 4-1 Nadal*: Impressive mental toughness from 
Federer, who has an ace chalked off by a bad call from the line judge - forced 
instead to replay the point on a slice serve that had caught the tramline and 
left Nadal flat-footed. In response, he simply delivers another ace - this time 
down the middle of the court.

First set tie-break: Federer* 4-3 Nadal: This time Federer loses a challenge, 
incorrectly believing that Nadal's serve down the middle of the court had 
missed the line.

First set tie-break: Federer 6-3 Nadal*: Three set points coming up for 
Federer, who outfoxes Nadal with a feathered backhand dropshot from the middle 
of the court.

First set tie-break: Federer* 6-5 Nadal: Nadal refuses to go quietly, holding 
both service points – the latter with a booming forehand pass.

Roger Federer wins the first set 7-6 (7-5): Federer gets across the line with 
the help of an unforced error from Nadal, who biffs a backhand beyond the 
baseline just as the pair were beginning to exchange blows from the back of the 
court. A big break for the Swiss, but credit to him - he didn't drop a single 
service point during that tie-break.

Second set: Federer* 1-0 Nadal: Wow. Seriously, wow. What a difference that 
tie-break seems to have made to Federer's state of mind, the Swiss breaking his 
opponentto love in the opening game of the new set. Blimey. "Who is the "1" in 
133-1?" asks@prasids <https://twitter.com/#!/prasids> on Twitter – referencing 
the statistic I cited earlier regarding the Spaniard's record when winning the 
first set in grand slams. I'm sorry to admit that I'm not sure. Anyone out 
there got the answer to hand?

Second set: Federer 1-1 Nadal*: And then Nadal breaks to love right back! 
Incredible stuff from Nadal, who bludgeons his way straight back into the game, 
albeit with the help of some sloppiness from his opponent. It will be 
interesting to see how both of these players react to the interruption expected 
in the next 15 minutes or so for Australia Day fireworks.

Second set: Federer* 1-2 Nadal: Just when you thought that receiving was the 
new serving, Nadal manages to secure a hold – even if not without another few 
wobbles. This is the first time he has led in a set so far in this match. 
"David Ferrer beat Nadal at the US Open in I think 2007 after Rafa won the 
first set," writes Paul Stubbs in response to our earlier question. In fact,
he's even sent in a link to prove it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/05/sports/tennis/05nadal.html>.

Second set: Federer 2-2 Nadal*: An easy hold to love for Federer, helped 
immeasurably by some excellent first serves. How can a man make it look this 
effortless, having made it look like such a struggle in just his last service 
game? Mentally, he really does just seem to struggle against Nadal as soon as 
he becomes aware that he has put himself in a strong position that he dare not 
waste.

Second set: Federer* 2-3 Nadal: These two had been a perfect four for four on 
break points so far in this match, but at 30-40 in this game Federer blows one 
– slapping a very loose forehand beyond the baseline. An uncharacteristic 
mistake – and a big one, in the event, as Nadal recovers to hold on deuce.

Second set: Federer 2-4 Nadal*: Outrageous, outrageous shot-making from Nadal, 
who not only recovers a backhand volley from Federer well outside the back 
left-hand corner of the court but delivers it straight back past his opponent 
with a stinging forehand. That makes it 0-40 and though Federer is able to save 
the first two break points Nadal finally takes the game at the third attempt, 
punching another stunning passing shot down the line – this time on his 
backhand – with next to no backswing. Wonderful tennis.

Second set: Federer* 2-5 Nadal: Rafael Nadal's first serve might not be quite 
as intimidating a prospect as Federer's but the Spaniard has landed more than 
80% of them in so far in this game and that makes a huge difference (Federer is 
nearer 60%). Another hold, and Nadal is on the verge of levelling this match 
back up. Meantime, here's an email from a reader who would like to be known 
simply as ET (no, not that one): "I'm following the game on AO Radio at work, 
and the commentators seem to have assigned one person just to keep track of 
Nadal's 'trouser adjustments' (their words). 29, last time they gave an update. 
For those of you at home keeping score."

And now we're really seeing some fireworks … because the official Australia 
Day explosives are now being set off in Melbourne. Federer and Nadal slink off 
the court for a comfort break, both looking rather unimpressed. It'll probably 
be about a quarter of an hour before play resumes. In the meantime, happy 
Australia Day!

Could the fireworks have been delayed until there was a set break? That's the 
question being asked on Eurosport, but my colleague Tom Lutz sees the folly in 
such a suggestion. "You can't stop patriotism," he declares.

Rafael Nadal wins the second set 6-2, levelling the scores at one set all: 
Federer returns from the fireworks display with a double fault, which quickly 
leads into a service game lost to love. Perhaps both players just thought they 
better make up for the time lost during that break. Niall Sheerin, meanwhile, 
is similarly unimpressed with Eurosport's suggestion that the fireworks be 
delayed to accomodate the tennis. "The cheek of it, really," he tsks. "Another 
example of cocooned sports stars full of their own self-importance?"

Third set: Federer* 0-1 Nadal: Nadal is just totally on top right now, playing 
with a confidence that just wasn't there in the first part of the first set but 
which now appears irresistible. He holds to love, and up in the stands Mirka 
Federer's fingernails get a good chewing.

Third set: Federer 1-1 Nadal*: "It's always reported in these games that when 
Nadal is doing well, Federer is making mistakes that help him, whereas when Fed 
is doing well, it's because of his imperious play," complains David Braga. "The 
truth is that when Nadal's playing well, he forces Fed to make mistakes due to 
the power and pressure he places on him." There's certainly some truth in that, 
David, though at this particular moment Federer really does seem to have lost 
his way. Nadal can hardly claim credit for two double-faults from the Swiss 
slides to 0-40. Just when the game and the match seem to be slipping away from 
him, however, Federer rouses himself, dragging himself back to deuce and 
eventually getting across the line with a dropshot that Nadal reaches but can't 
quite squeeze back over the net.

Third set: Federer* 1-2 Nadal: And as much as that last service game was a 
struggle for Federer, this one is utterly effortless for Nadal. A total 
reversal of the situation at the beginning of this match.

Third set: Federer 2-2 Nadal*: Ah, that's better for Federer, banging down 
aces for a love hold that will come as a huge boost after his recent struggles.

Third set: Federer* 2-3 Nadal: Any thought that Federer's love hold might 
prove a launchpad for an assault on the Nadal serve is quickly quashed, the 
Spaniard holding to love as his opponent proves unable to land his backhand 
returns inside the court. "Fans seem remarkably split...see if this changes as 
match goes on," tweets Sports Illustrated's Jon Wertheim (@jon_wertheim 
<https://twitter.com/#!/jon_wertheim>).

Third set: Federer 3-3 Nadal*: Another double fault from Federer – who has now 
hit four in this match, while Nadal is yet to hit one – but he secures the 
hold, rushing the net at 40-30 and daring his opponent to attempt the pass. 
Nadal duly does so, but his forehand flies just long.

Third set: Federer* 4-3 Nadal: Well it looked as though Federer might have 
missed his opportunity - blowing a break point at 30-40 and then two more on 
deuce - but instead he hangs in there to take the game, dragging Nadal around 
the court on the final point before the Spaniard eventually delivers a backhand 
into the tramlines. Now, can he hold his nerve and press home this advantage?

Third set: Federer 4-4 Nadal*: No, no he can't. A lack of courage, perhaps, 
from Federer – who retreats into a more defensive approach and pays the price. 
At 15-40, Federer he nets a backhand that was always lacking in conviction. As, 
indeed, was his performance throughout that game.

Third set: Federer* 4-5 Nadal: And now Federer will have to serve to stay in 
the set, Nadal outlasting the Swiss on an epic rally at 30-15 before closing 
out the game on the next point. We also just saw the unforced errors count. 
Federer is up over 40, while Nadal is not yet at 25.

Third set: Federer 5-5 Nadal*: Another tie-break, anyone? We're just two games 
away from that now, as Federer holds to 15 – closing out again with the serve 
and volley: dispatching a backhand overhead to the back of the court after 
Nadal had shown typically ridiculous speed and persistence to retrieve an 
initial volleyed dropshot from the Swiss.

Third set: Federer* 5-6 Nadal: A frustrating game for Federer, who looked 
threatening at 30-30 but twice sees his forehands ping back off the net cord on 
the next two points. Big game coming up. Obviously.

Third set: Federer 6-6 Nadal*: Federer clings on – just – after falling behind 
30-40 in a game which he had begun with an ace. Nadal was on top for a lot of 
that game – keeping Federer under constant pressure at the back of the court 
– but on break point the Swiss came up with a wonderful passing forehand, and 
on deuce it was Nadal who made the mistakes.

Third set tie-break: Federer* 0-1 Nadal: Nadal holds his first service point.

Third set tie-break: Federer 1-2 Nadal*: And an immediate mini-break for 
Nadal, too, catching Federer out with his first dropshot of the match.

Third set tie-break: Federer* 1-4 Nadal: Loose, very loose indeed from 
Federer, who fails to react sharply enough to a short ball from Nadal that hops 
up hard from the middle of the court, and winds up winging his backhand long.

Third set tie-break: Federer 1-6 Nadal*: It's all falling apart for Federer 
now, dropping both points on serve – the latter with a tame slapped forehand 
into the net.

Third set tie-break: Federer* 3-6 Nadal: An exceptional, exceptional 
cross-court backhand from Federer to rescue the first of five set points for 
Nadal, and he gets the next one two as the Spaniard returns a flat backhand 
into the net.

Third set tie-break: Federer* 5-6 Nadal: And there's two more rescued right 
there – though Nadal will still get one more on serve. A fine first serve 
straight down the middle of the court there has Nadal lunging desperately 
across the court. The Spaniard gets the frame of his racket to the ball, but 
that is all.

Rafael Nadal wins the third set, and leads 6-7, 6-2, 7-6 But it's too little, 
too late for Federer, Nadal taking the tie-break at the fifth attempt (and the 
set at the sixth, if you take into account his break point on the Swiss's final 
service game). It doesn't look good for Federer now – in grand slam matches 
where these two have split the first two sets, the winner of the third set has 
always gone on to win.

Fourth set: Federer 1-0 Nadal*: "Do you think Federer will ever win another 
grand slam," muses my colleague Rob Smyth. It feels an increasingly distant 
prospect. Even were he to prevail in this match, could he follow up with a win 
over Novak Djokovic or Andy Murray? Nevertheless, he starts the new set with a 
hold to 15.

Fourth set: Federer* 1-1 Nadal: While others seem to tire over the course of a 
five-set match, Nadal somehow just seems to get better – as though the first 
three sets were merely an elaborate warm-up. His forehand is really firing now, 
and Federer is not even able to tee off on his second serve, Nadal keeping 
Federer guessing as he alternates between different corners of the service box, 
generating huge topspin as he does and having the ball alternately ride up away 
from his opponent or into his body. An easy hold to 15.

Fourth set: Federer 2-1 Nadal*: Federer continues to wobble, handing Nadal 
another break point at 30-40 before the old muscle memory kicks in – the Swiss 
following up one unreturnable serve with another down the middle of the court. 
Nadal does manage to get the ball back as he sends down another venomous 
delivery – this time out wide – on game point, but Federer is waiting at the 
net to kill the point with a clean backhand volley. "This is only a great 
rivalry now in the figures," announces Dan Smith. "The pattern is set - Federer 
will never be able to overcome the mental weight of too many Grand Slam defeats 
to Nadal. It's a shame because he's in the better form and because Nadal is, 
similarly, unlikely to overcome the baggage of last year's defeats to Djokovic. 
It's all in their heads."

Fourth set: Federer* 2-2 Nadal: Nadal continues to toy with Federer, dabbing 
him around the back of the court like a cat with a mouse. Just one dropped 
point again as he holds with ease.

Fourth set: Federer 3-2 Nadal*: At 15-30 Federer attacks the net after an 
approach shot that really gave him no right to do so, and Nadal duly slugs the 
ball back past him down the line to give himself two break points. But like the 
murderous villain at the end of a horror movie, Federer somehow keeps coming 
back from the dead, rousing himself to win the next four points with a 
combination of big serving and some unconvincing but ultimately effective net 
play.

Fourth set: Federer* 3-3 Nadal: A love service game for Nadal, sealed with an 
ace, puts Federer straight back under pressure to respond. There's no question 
as to who is playing the better tennis at this moment. Nadal looks has the air 
of a predator bracing himself for the kill.

Fourth set: Federer 4-3 Nadal*: Then again … Federer holds himself to 15, 
delivering another placed passing shot down the right-hand tramline on the 
final point. "It seems slightly odd that people are mentioning Andy Murray as 
an obstacle to Federer winning another Slam," writes Bob Coppin. "I agree that 
Nadal and Djokovic seem to be quite a bit better that Roger these days, but 
Murray? A good player, possibly a brilliant one, but not in the same bracket as 
those top three. He's tennis's Mark Ramprakash - wonderfully talented but just 
falls short at the highest level. I think Federer would wipe the floor with him 
if, by some miracle, they both got through to this year's final."

Fourth set: Federer* 4-4 Nadal: A raucous Mexican wave delays the start of 
Nadal's latest service game, and though I must confess personally to being 
totally bored of these, it does in the end feel like a fitting build-up to a 
brilliant game – control see-sawing back and forth as we move from 15-30, to 
40-30, to advantage Federer. The Swiss blows his first break points of the set 
with an over-eager attempt at a cross-court winner – opening his body out and 
punching the ball into the far tramlines. Nadal does not allow him another 
chance, closing out with a booming forehand which Federer can barely scrape 
with his frame as it passes by.

Fourth set: Federer 4-5 Nadal*: Surely, but surely, this is it now? Nadal 
prevails in a long, long rally at 30-30, dragging Federer back and forth across 
the baseline until his opponent is finally reduced to jabbing a two-handed 
backhand into the net - only for Federer to once again rescue the break point. 
The shoe is on the other foot on deuce as Federer drives Nadal away beyond the 
back left corner of the court, but out of nowhere the Spaniard summons an 
incredible passing shot to give himself another break point. This time Federer 
cannot recover, lifting a crosscourt backhand into the far tramlines. He 
challenges, but more out of hope than expectation. The call stands.

Rafael Nadal wins 6-7, 6-2, 7-6, 6-4 That's it, Nadal is through to the final 
of the Australian Open, defeating Federer yet again at a grand slam to further 
reinforce his domination of a rivalry that looks ever-more one-sided. Federer 
did not go quietly, forcing two match points on deuce but eventually 
surrendering to the inevitable, winging a passing forehand just long on the 
Spaniard's first advantage. For Nadal, either Novak Djokovic or Andy Murray 
await in the final. For Federer, the question will continue to be asked ever 
louder. Has he won his last grand slam?
 