
My ex-husband, Roger Nuttall, who has died aged 82, was a financial journalist 
and former City editor of the Mail on Sunday.

Son of Albert, a printer and bookie’s clerk, and Winifred, Roger was born and 
brought up in south London, and went to Raynes Park grammar school. He began 
his working life as an actuary – which he was fond of describing as “a job for 
people who find accountancy too stimulating” – and drifted into journalism via 
the trade press. In his earlier career he worked variously for the Times and 
the Telegraph, and in 1974 he joined the Mail on Sunday, working as deputy to 
the City editor, Patrick Sergeant, before taking over from him.

Roger’s love was writing rather than editing. Like many working people as they 
rise through the ranks, he found himself organising other people rather than 
doing what he loved to do. So in 1989 he “demoted” himself by quitting the Mail 
on Sunday and joining the Daily Express as a jobbing reporter on the City 
pages. Around 2000, he turned freelance and edited the newly revived City 
gossip column Blackfriar, until the owner of Express Newspapers, Richard 
Desmond,axed the column as part of a cost-cutting exercise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/jun/18/citynews.pressandpublishing>. In 
his latter years before retiring, Roger continued to work as a freelance, 
advising on the serialisation of books for the Times and occasionally writing 
obituaries for the files about people who were still alive.

Roger was the archetypal self-made man. Supremely intelligent and interested 
in everything, from art and poetry to politics and science, he read copiously 
and was one of the best-informed men around. His bulging bookshelf contained, 
apart from the Complete Works of Pepys and pretty well everything written by 
Evelyn Waugh, items such as Archy and Mehitabel by Don Marquis, featuring a 
poetry-writing cockroach and a cat who used to be Cleopatra, and a book about 
false teeth. His great passion was jazz, and at one time he played the trombone 
with various ad hoc bands of journalists.

He is survived by his partner, Oli Villalon; by Tom and Peggy, the children of 
our marriage; by Simon and Sarah, the children of his first marriage, to 
Pauline, which ended in divorce; and by two grandsons.
 