
No horse has won back-to-back runnings of the King George VI and Queen 
Elizabeth Stakes this century but Roger Varian believes his stable star, 
Postponed, is in the form of his life and can become only the third in the 
history of the race to complete this gruelling double.

The son of Dubawi won Ascot’s midsummer championship after a stirring battle 
by a nose from Eagle Top for Luca Cumani 12 months ago but was subsequently 
transferred by his owner, Sheikh Mohammed Obaid Al Maktoum, to Varian’s 
Newmarket yard.

The master of Kremlin House could be described as a safe pair of hands having 
stepped into the breach when the hugely respected Michael Jarvis retired in 
2011, forcing Varian to take the reins of the 124-horse string (it now numbers 
180).

Limato lifts Henry Candy by crushing rivals in Newmarket’s July Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/limato-henry-candy-july-cup-newmarket-harry-bentley-glorious-goodwood-horse-racing>
Jarvis was one of the most approachable top-flight trainers in the sport and 
his protégé has not only maintained the level of excellence in the results on 
the racecourse but also in how he deals with the public and the media in 
particular.

Varian’s takeover was seamless and so has been his handling of Postponed who 
has won each of his three races impressively under his care.

With less than two weeks until the King George Varian claims Postponed is 
“exactly where I want him to be”.

“Postponed is in great form and I am very happy with him,” he said. “He had an 
easy week after Epsom [when winning the Coronation Cup] as we had a little bit 
of a gap between then andAscot <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot>. He 
seems as well as ever. We now just need two smooth weeks with him and I will be 
very happy.”

Postponed is the joint highest rated racehorse in Europe with a rating of 124, 
which suggests the handicapper believes he is a 6lb better horse than 12 months 
ago. It is hard to argue with that assessment as, since joining Varian, the 
handsome five-year-old has added two Group One races to his tally, including 
the Dubai Sheema Classic where he wiped the floor against the Japanese 
superstar Duramente.

His most recent success at Epsom saw him stroll home four and a half lengths 
clear of the Breeders’ Cup Turf heroine Found.

Unlike many of his rival trainers, Varian will not be too bothered by the 
weather forecasts as his stable star has won major Group races on ground 
ranging from very soft through to good to firm. “To be honest ground is not a 
concern for him. I think he is probably a better horse on good to firm but I 
wouldn’t be making any excuses on any other ground,” the Newmarket trainer said.

As to what makes Postponed the champion that he is, Varian added: “He has all 
the attributes of a great horse. He is remarkably versatile, has a great 
attitude and most importantly a huge engine. It doesn’t matter if you run him 
over the undulations of Epsom or the Flat expanses of Meydan, he always does 
his job. “

The King George had lost a little of its attraction in recent years but with a 
superstar like Postponed making it the next stop of his campaign for global 
domination, it is a great result for Ascot and more importantly the standing of 
the race.

Varian is a long-time fan of the event and admits he is thrilled at having the 
likely favourite. He said: “As a youngster getting into racing I used to love 
the King George watching greats like Lammtarra, Pentire and Swain [the last 
dual winner], and it was high on my wish list of races to win. Postponed’s 
participation will certainly add lustre to one of the most important Flat 
races. But this is not a one-horse race by any means. He faces some seriously 
smart rivals and everyone knows it is never easy winning a race of this status.”

The Classic-winning trainer also has what he describes as “the top older miler 
in Europe” in the guise of Belardo. His Dewhurst Stakes winner has already won 
the Group One Lockinge Stakes this season and was narrowly beaten by the highly 
rated American raider, Tepin, in the Queen Anne Stakes at Royal Ascot.

“He is also in great form and targets being considered are the Sussex Stakes 
[at Glorious Goodwood] or possibly the Prix Jacques Le Marois [at Deauville].

“He used to need soft ground but, as he has developed and matured, he has 
shown he can handle quicker ground, as he did so successfully at Newbury.”

The likeable Varian’s career has been on an upward curve since he took out a 
licence in 2011 and it looks sure to continue in the ascendant as he and 
Postponed continue their association, which could ultimately lead to the 
Breeders’ Cup at Santa Anita in November.
 