
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> has launched a new 
programme called Trips, with the aim of transforming itself into a travel 
company.

The move marks the most significant expansion since the company was founded 
eight years ago as a peer-to-peer property rental service.


 Airbnb’s chief executive, Brian Chesky, kicked off a three-day event in Los 
Angeles on Thursday at which he said Airbnb would offer travellers the 
opportunity to create itineraries for hours or days that afford a more 
authentic local experience.

 “If you want to travel, you basically end up on a research project,” Chesky 
said. “We want to fix this.”

 The service, Chesky said, is available now as an upgrade to the Airbnb app in 
four US cities – Detroit, Los Angeles, Miami and San Francisco – and eight 
other cities – Cape Town, Florence, Havana, London, Nairobi, Paris, Seoul and 
Tokyo. They will be in more than 50 cities next year, Chesky said.

 The travel service could help Airbnb move away from being strictly a 
home-rental business and to justify its $30bn (£24bn) valuation, which far 
exceeds the worth of any hotel company.

Airbnb faces worldwide opposition. It plans a movement to rise up in its 
defence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/29/airbnb-backlash-customers-fight-back-london>
 It also dovetails with a campaign the company launched earlier this year to 
encourage travellers to skip the big tourist sites and hotels, opting instead 
to live like locals when abroad.

 The travel service comes as the company faces regulatory crackdowns around 
the world, with cities including Amsterdam, Berlin and New York working to 
limit short-term rentals that hinder housing stock in tight rental markets.

 Last month, the governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, signed a law that would 
place new regulations on online home rental companies such as Airbnb.

 Existing New York state law bars most urban apartment-dwellers from renting 
out their flats for less than 30 days if they are not present.

 The law recently passed by the state legislature would bar even advertising a 
rental that violates that existing law, which could help regulators crack down 
on Airbnb itself in addition to the users of its service.

 On Thursday, a US judge said Airbnb and the city of San Francisco must work 
harder to resolve a court case over an ordinance forbidding the company from 
taking bookings from hosts who have not registered their homes.

Airbnb is driving up the rent in your urban neighborhood | Alexander Zaitchik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/airbnb-rent-unaffordable-elizabeth-warren-neighborhoods>
 District Judge James Donato in San Francisco said he would issue an order 
prohibiting the city from enforcing the ordinance to give both sides more time 
to work on a fair way to enforce the local law.

 The San Francisco ordinance, enacted in August, makes it illegal for Airbnb 
to collect fees for providing booking services for rentals not properly 
registered with the city.

 Airbnb makes money by charging a service fee on bookings. Airbnb contended 
that the ordinance violated a broad federal law that protects internet 
companies from liability for content posted on their platforms.
 