
The Scandinavian diet is famously hard going for anyone who doesn’t like 
pickled fish – and a unique archaeological discovery has proved that it was 
exactly the same more than 9,000 years ago.

The find has revealed that freshwater fish were being fermented on an 
industrial scale in southern Sweden, through a complicated and distinctly 
unappetising process involving pine bark and seal blubber, which made the 
region capable of supporting a far larger population than previously thought.


The discovery was made during the excavation of an early Mesolithic settlement 
site in Blekinge, on the Baltic sea in southern Sweden. It is the earliest 
evidence of fermentation being used to preserve food anywhere in the world.


The fish were preserved without salt or storage jars. Instead they were 
acidified using pine bark, wrapped up with seal fat in seal or wild boar skins, 
and buried in a pit. The process required a cold climate to help preserve the 
fish until the fermentation was complete, when they were dug up for 
consumption. A similar process is still used to produce the Icelandic delicacy 
of rotted shark meat.


The technique may have been widespread, but the evidence has not survived as 
fragile fish bones usually decompose without trace: at Blekinge they were 
preserved by the soil conditions, but even so archaeologists had to use a fine 
mesh sieve to retrieve them.


Adam Boethius, an osteologist at Lund University, who publishes his findings 
this week in theJournal of Archaeological Science 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305440316000170%20> (under 
the title Something Rotten in Scandinavia) said: “The discovery is quite unique 
as a find like this has never been made before. That is partly because fish 
bones are so fragile and disappear more easily than, for example, bones of land 
animals. In this case, the conditions were quite favourable, which helped 
preserve the remains.”


The site yielded vast quantities of fish bones, which have been dated to 
around 9,200 years old: the archaeologists were excavating them at the rate of 
30,000 to the square metre, along with scraps of the pine bark. Under the bone 
layer they found an oblong pit surrounded by stake holes. The scientists 
calculate that at least 60,000 tons of freshwater fish were processed at the 
site.


Scientists had thought that at this early date the population of northern 
Europe consisted of scattered groups of hunter gatherers, while the Middle East 
was seeing the emergence of agriculture and larger settled groups. However, 
such a well developed technique for processing and storing fish stocks could 
have supported a far larger population. “From a global perspective, the 
development in the Nordic region could correspond to that of the Middle East at 
the time,” Boethius said.

 