
On Thursday evening, some of the biggest beasts in British television found 
themselves gazing up at the larger than life face of Google's chief executive, 
Eric Schmidt.Mark Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>, 
the director general of the BBC, had persuaded Schmidt to address delegates at 
the biennial RTS conference in Cambridge, answering questions live via 
satellite link from New York.

The image was rich in symbolism, for Google has arguably done more than any 
other media organisation to throw the TV industry into disarray, disrupting 
business models and taking advertising cash that would once have been stuffed 
into the pockets of commercial broadcasters.

Yet, the threat posed by Google and others still seemed distant to many. 
Instead, it was the fight between theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 and government that hove into view.

Thompson, who chaired this year's conference, opened it by saying the industry 
is facing a political and economic storm. The BBC – and the director general 
himself – spent most of the week at the centre of it, slammed by the culture 
minister in his first major address as well as – more usual suspects – the 
corporation's commercial rivals and the Tories.

Yet the entire broadcasting industry is feeling the chill wind of an 
advertising downturn and structural upheaval. What is more, two of the biggest 
broadcasters are without the protection of a leader. Channel 4's chief 
executive,Andy Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, announced 
his departure on the eve of the conference while its chairman, Luke Johnson, 
will also be gone by the beginning of next year.

Strong attack

Meanwhile, the former Sky boss Tony Ball is expected to be parachuted in as 
chief executive of ITV, the UK's largest commercial broadcaster, barring any 
last-minute hitches. His appointment is expected to hasten the departure of its 
chairman,Michael Grade <https://www.theguardian.com/media/michaelgrade>. Mike 
Darcy, BSkyB's chief operating officer, was the only representative from the 
relatively recession-proof pay-TV giant, although the words of his boss James 
Murdoch's MacTaggart lecture last month seemed to hang in the air.

It was particularly Murdoch's strong attack on the BBC and its "chilling" 
effect on competition that seemed to reverberate across the Fens to Cambridge.

Thompson tried to frame the debate around two key questions – one commercial, 
the other political. How can broadcasters find business models that are 
profitable enough to sustain quality programming? And how might the election of 
a Conservative government next spring change the media landscape?

Yet the new culture secretary, Ben Bradshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ben-bradshaw>, stole the show with the 
opening keynote address. Many were astounded that a Labour minister would 
attack the BBC Trust created by the government just two years ago, complain 
bitterly about the corporation's reluctance to share the licence fee and raise 
the prospect of cutting it down to size. Bradshaw's Conservative opposite 
number, Jeremy Hunt, muttered darkly about government U-turns and positioned 
himself as an unlikely defender of the BBC by repeating his opposition to 
"top-slicing" the licence fee. The fear, however, is that a Tory government may 
implement deeper cuts.

Why did Bradshaw, a former BBC journalist, choose to attack the corporation? 
Government sources insist that he genuinely believes that the trust, which is 
both regulator and cheerleader, does not work. But, as its chairman, Michael 
Lyons, pointed out in response to Bradshaw's speech, the government could at 
least have given it until the next licence fee settlement in 2012 to call time. 
Others believe Bradshaw is irritated by Lyons's decision to oppose top-slicing 
so vehemently, and so publicly. Lyons has taken to the airwaves repeatedly to 
argue that the licence fee must not be shared out or used to pay for children's 
TV or regional news on commercial channels. He conceded last week that it 
sounded like an argument for "anoraks", but the BBC is worried that it could 
set a dangerous precedent.

Privately, the corporation says Bradshaw is determined to demonstrate who is 
in charge by driving though the top-slicing proposals before the next election. 
That could yet prompt a dramatic confrontation with Lyons and Thompson, who 
have staked their reputations on defeating top- slicing.

Tooth and nail

In the meantime, the BBC is making concillatory noises to commercial 
competitors, conceding that it may have to shrink to survive. Responding to 
Bradshaw's attack in a hastily written but eloquent speech, Thompson said: "We 
have to accept that to many in commercial media we seem relatively bigger and 
stronger than ever." He is carrying out a wide-ranging review that will look at 
every one of the BBC's services and ask which should remain, but few expect any 
major outlets to be axed.

Rivals such as James Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> 
will hardly have been satisfied that he almost immediately went on to say: "We 
will fight tooth and nail to preserve our broad public remit." Most analysts 
believe that the BBC will see out Bradshaw, along with the Labour government's 
enthusiasm for top-slicing, and greet a Tory government by agreeing to hand 
back the spare digital switchover cash to taxpayers. The key question is 
whether that measure, along with an executive pay freeze and a crackdown on the 
salaries of its biggest stars, will be enough to placate David Cameron.

Perhaps the most intriguing element of Bradshaw's attack was his perceived 
endorsement of what Murdoch called a "far, far smaller" BBC, or at least a 
slightly smaller corporation. Is this an attempt to curry favour with the 
Murdochs in a run-up to the election?

This focus on what is, after all, the broadcaster least affected by the 
downturn distracted delegates from the most pressing issue – the survival of 
commercial broadcasting. The number of delegates at Cambridge was down by 25% 
on previous years. Advertising has collapsed by up to 20%, with no recovery 
predicted until at least 2012. "This is an industry in denial," said Duncan. 
"The advertising market will never return to its former size."

Set against this economic background, the never-ending debate about which form 
of public subsidy should be used to prop up C4 seems almost trivial. Where do 
three days of high-level discussion and the much-heralded departure of its top 
team leave the broadcaster? Duncan's begging bowl strategy, which ranged from 
asking for a share of the licence fee to some sort of merger with BBC 
Worldwide, appears to have failed, although C4 sources insist that partnership 
discussions with the BBC are continuing. It will be for the new management team 
to decide whether to pursue that approach, or do what Thompson proposed when he 
was C4 chief executive and engineer a merger with Five, which is keenly sought 
by the station's German owner, RTL.

The alternative, remaining a slimmed down, independent, government-owned 
broadcaster, looks increasingly unfeasible. When the former BBC executive 
Lorraine Heggessey, now the chief executive of TalkbackThames, asked Hunt last 
week whether he would consider restoring generous tax breaks to film making in 
the UK, the shadow culture secretary replied: "There is no money in the pot. We 
have to sort out the national finances. The question is, what will generate 
more tax money, not less?" Privatising C4 would hand a new Tory government a 
small amount of cash – perhaps a few hundred million – but does it have the 
political will to fix C4?

It was apt that Clive Hollick, who drew up an earlier plan for a merger 
between C4 and Five in 2003, suddenly popped up at Cambridge as a last-minute 
delegate. The deal is fast becoming the one that will not die and although RTL, 
ultimately owned by the Bertelsmann family, is not willing to fund a major UK 
acquisition now, it could do so next year if banks begin to lend again on 
reasonable terms.

A bigger merger, with ITV for example, may be jeopardised by the decision by 
the Competition Commission to keep the CRR mechanism – governing the amount ITV 
can charge advertisers – in place.

It may fall to Grade to persuade the commission to soften its stance, giving 
him the opportunity to put his lobbying skills to use for what may prove to be 
the last time. As he prepares to bow out, it would be an anticlimactic final 
act for a man so steeped in broadcasting history and not the end to a long 
career that Grade must have hoped for when he took the ITV job. In this 
environment, even the Grade family are no longer the big beasts they once were.

• This article was amended on Tuesday 22 September 2009. The photograph above 
of Ben Bradshaw and Mark Thompson at the Royal Television Society's meeting in 
Cambridge should have been credited to Paul Hampartsoumian. This has been 
corrected.
 