
Rupert Wilkinson, who has died aged 78, was a key figure in the growth of 
American studies in the UK. He published 10 books ranging from analyses of 
political elites to studies of the American character. His most recent,
Surviving a Japanese Internment Camp (2014) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jan/11/my-father-was-a-wartime-spy>
, was a breathtaking history of a second world war prison camp in the 
Philippines where he himself had been interned as a child.

Drawing on this formative experience, Rupert developed a consuming curiosity 
about human behaviour and institutions. This resulted in a body of written work 
of striking intensity and power. His teaching was just as remarkable. As a 
first-year postgraduate in the early 1970s I was astonished to find a teacher 
who was as interested in learning from me as I was from him. He was always 
asking questions, difficult ones, and would often squirrel away the answers for 
use later on – always with generous acknowledgement.

Born in Surrey, in 1938 Rupert moved with his family to the Philippines, where 
his father, Gerald, was in the sugar business but also worked for British 
intelligence. After Pearl Harbor, Gerald joined the British army, becoming 
liaison officer between British forces and the US Philippine commander, General 
Douglas MacArthur. Gerald was whisked out of the country when the Japanese took 
Manila, while Rupert, his mother Lorna (nee Davies) and elder sister Mary June 
were interned as enemy aliens in a prison camp for three years. It is little 
wonder that this experience led him to something close to an obsession with the 
workings of authority.

Schooling at Winchester college, which he hated for its culture of bullying, 
reinforced that preoccupation. During national service, his stammer barred 
entry into officer class and he drove a truck in the RAF Regiment. However, it 
was American GIs who had liberated the Japanese camp and it was to America he 
escaped. He studied government at Harvard, followed by a PhD at Stanford in 
history and social science. Heavily influenced at Harvard by the sociologist
David Riesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/13/guardianobituaries.socialsciences>
, Rupert found his academic niche somewhere between sociology, political theory 
and history, which prepared him perfectly for teaching and writing in the 
relatively new interdisciplinary field of American studies.

Driven by his own painful struggles with the private school system, Rupert’s 
first book, The Prefects (1964), was a critical analysis of the relationship 
between that system and British leadership, and a comparative study in the 
making of rulers. The Times’ review noted that Rupert found “similarities 
between the wearers of the old school tie, Imperial China’s Confucian system, 
the Jesuits and the advertising tycoons”.

Appointed to a lectureship at Sussex University in 1966, he joined a young 
department which, under Marcus Cunliffe, became a leading centre for study and 
teaching. Rupert spent his entire career at Sussex, becoming a reader in 1973 
and professor in 1989.

The biggest fruit of his early years at Sussex was The Broken Rebel: A Study 
in Culture, Politics and the Authoritarian Character (1972). Taking off from 
the Authoritarian Personality, the famous study byTheodor Adorno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/25/anders-breivik-frankfurt-school?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 and others, it went much further, unpicking the relationship between 
authoritarian character and social environment, specifically in Germany and the 
US.

From there Rupert turned his attention to American character considered more 
broadly, the results of which appeared in American Tough: The Tough-Guy 
Tradition and American Character (1984) and The Pursuit of American Character 
(1988). He also edited an anthology of writing on American culture, American 
Social Character: Modern Interpretations from the 40s to the Present (1992). 
Not least of Rupert’s achievements was to show that the question of American 
character was by no means the passé subject some believed it to be. Americans 
continued and continue to obsess about it and Rupert was its most sensitive and 
thoughtful chronicler.

After retirement in 1999 Rupert worked as hard as ever, producing an 
exhaustively researched and pioneering volume on the financing of American 
higher education, Aiding Students, Buying Students: Financial Aid in America 
(2005). As with his other books, his interest went far beyond the academic, 
reflecting his passion for social justice, education and student welfare. Care 
for his students was much in evidence during his time at Sussex, too, where he 
set up a year-abroad scheme forAmerican studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> students and co-founded 
an international summer school.

He is survived by his wife, Mary, children, Matthew, Camilla and Clara, and 
six grandchildren.

• Rupert Hugh Wilkinson, scholar of American studies, born 18 May 1936; died 
21 December 2014
 