
At a literary party in the 1950s I found myself standing next to a small, 
olive-skinned woman in an elegant sari. Earlier I had heard her speaking to our 
hostess in what had seemed to be a faintly Indian accent. Since on both sides 
of my family I have connections with India going back for generations, my 
conversational opening was: "What part of India do you come from?" With a small 
smile, the woman replied: "I don't come from any part ofIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. I merely live there. In Delhi."

She smiled again, head uptilted, clearly enjoying my amazement. "What took you 
there?" She replied that what had motivated her had not been a romantic impulse 
or a deliberate desire to learn about a different culture, but merely the 
chance that, as a student at Queen Mary, University of London, she had met and 
fallen in love with an Indian student, Cyrus Jhabvala, later to become a 
distinguished architect, and so had married him.

Gradually, in the ensuing conversation, I realised that this woman was Ruth 
Prawer Jhabvala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/03/ruth-prawer-jhabvala>, a writer 
whom, even then when she was far less famous, I had already come to admire.

Mine has always been the, perhaps now old-fashioned, view that one of the 
essential gifts for a novelist is the ability to know precisely what it is like 
to be someone other than oneself. Jhabvala possesses not merely that ability, 
but also the rarer ability to become someone else. She was born into a 
well-to-do cultivated, happy German-Jewish family in Cologne in 1927. But in 
1939 an inevitable decision had to be taken: to survive, father, mother, Ruth 
and a brother who eventually became an Oxford professor of German language and 
literature, sought refuge from the Nazis in England. With the adaptability of a 
child, Jhabvala was soon indistinguishable from any other Jewish girl in north 
London.

These two transformations, from German into English and English into Indian, 
were to be followed by a third. When, in the early 70s, I met her at another 
literary party, she spoke of her decision, soon to be implemented, to quit 
India for the States. Having just returned from India, I had been speaking to 
her of the conflicting emotions that the vast country had aroused in me: on the 
one hand an intense pleasure in its scenic beauty and on the other a horror at 
the suffering insistently visible all around me. I remember that I told her 
that, in order to stifle that horror, I made a deliberate decision to take only 
an aesthetic view of everything that I saw.

At that she demanded almost angrily: "But can you? Can you?"

She went on to tell me how she found herself more and more unwilling to go out 
of her comfortable Delhi flat into streets teeming with human misery. We agreed 
that the most terrible aspect of this misery was the realisation that to 
attempt to alleviate it was like attempting to bail out a sinking boat with a 
teaspoon.

After she had moved to the US, she produced more remarkable books and, having 
become friend and confidante of the highly successful film partnership of James 
Ivory and Ismail Merchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/may/26/guardianobituaries.film>, also 
scripts for such features asShakespeare Wallah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/87384/shakespeare-wallah>, 
Autobiography of a Princess, and The Europeans. But I think that, despite the 
high artistic quality of everything that she has written, she will, like 
Kipling, be above all remembered for her Indian tales. Some critics have seen 
her essentially as an outsider looking in on the exotic world to which her 
marriage transported her. But for me she seems miraculously to have become an 
insider from the first moment she arrived in so dauntingly alien a civilisation.

Certain types constantly recur in her stories. Of these, among her Indian men 
there is, first and foremost, the swami, powerful both in physique 
and personality, who dominates his followers and drains them of psychological 
and physical energy in order to charge his rampant egotism. Her attitude to 
such men is complex – is their authority truly supernatural or is it merely 
derived from their overweening personalities? In contrast, her Indian women, 
whether wives treated as mere chattels by their husbands, or mistresses treated 
with capricious generosity by their elderly patrons, are pathetically 
vulnerable. Her English males tend to be conventional, complacent, even feeble 
creatures, whose wives abandon them either for Indian lovers or for 
an itinerant life of seeking in vain for spiritual enlightenment.

Jhabvala has recorded that in writing about India she is "always attempting to 
present India to myself, in the hope of so giving myself some kind of foothold 
… I describe the Indian scene not for its own sake but for mine." As a result 
of this, she rarely refers explicitly to a multitude of political, social and 
moral problems. But, just as a diagnosis of an illness can be reached by 
examination of a drop of blood or of a tiny area of tissue, so a page or even 
merely a paragraph of one of her stories can provide a diagnosis of what is 
amiss with the beautiful but often frightening world that is her subject.

• How I Became a Holy Mother: And Other Stories 
<http://www.amazon.com/Became-Holy-Mother-Capuchin-Classics/dp/B007BWD23W> by 
Ruth Prawer Jhabvalais published by Capuchin Classics
 