
There have been few laughs in Anheuser-Busch InBev’s £65bn pursuit of SABMiller
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> but the bidder’s chief 
executive, Carlos Brito, at least offered this zinger: the creation of 
“Megabrew”, as the proposed combination has been dubbed, would lead to “more 
choice for consumers”. This seemed a highly unlikely proposition, since AB 
InBev, owner of Budweiser, Stella Artois and Beck’s, is a famously ruthless 
cost-cutter that doesn’t mess about with small brands and breweries. So Brito 
tried to explain.

“As an example, since our combination with Anheuser-Busch, we have 
successfully grown Budweiser globally, with international sales now accounting 
for over half of total volume,” he said. In other words, “more choice” means 
more Budweiser in more places around the world. This is a depressing vision. 
Americans know that Budweiser is as bland as mass-market lagers get: they are 
drinking it less and turning to craft beers.

What we might call the Coca-Cola-isation of the international beer market is 
under way and Megabrew, if it happens, would start life with a global share of 
30%, or almost one pint in every three. A few local regulators (in the US and 
China) would force a few disposals, but the new empire could still hope to have 
top or second slot in 24 of the world’s 30 biggest beer-drinking countries. 
More choice? Not a chance, whatever Brito adds vaguely aboutAB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> using its “innovation 
capabilities” to introduce “exciting new products”.

How about cheaper beer then? Don’t hold your breath. Brito didn’t even mention 
pricing in his consumer pitch. AB InBev would be ramping up its borrowings by 
$60bn to buy SAB and the financial demands mean the priority would be cutting 
jobs, not prices. SAB’s estimate, issued on Friday, that it could make its 
operations more efficient to the tune of $1.05bn by 2020 would be out of date 
on the day AB InBev took control. The new owner would seek at least twice that 
sum across its enlarged business.

Unfortunately, there is nothing standing in the way of this joyless takeover 
except SAB’s own shareholders. Altria, owner of Marlboro cigarettes, owns 27% 
of SAB and has already declared itself in favour. SAB’s board, minus Altria, 
rejected last week’s £42.15-a-share offer and managed to retain the support of 
the Santo Domingo family from Colombia, with a 14% stake, plus Kulczyk from 
Poland (3%), South Africa’s Public Investment Corporation (3%) and the UK’s 
Aberdeen Asset Management (2.7%). But in the next few days – probably on Monday 
– AB InBev will put its real bid on the table. If it is £45-a-share or more, 
the pressure on SAB chairman Jan du Plessis to agree terms will be intense. If 
the Santo Domingos wish to accept the improved price, SAB’s resistance will 
start to crumble and the battle will be as good as over.

That’s the way of open markets, of course. Almost all quoted companies are for 
sale by their shareholders and beer is nobody’s idea of a strategic industry; 
even South Africa, where SAB has its roots, would struggle to mount a 
public-interest defence.

Yet this entire adventure embodies the reasons why the debt-fuelled takeover 
culture, breeding corporate goliaths, eats away at consumers’ trust in big 
business. SAB is a company that has served its shareholders superbly: in its 16 
years on the London market it has been a superstar of the FTSE 100. It has been 
South Africa’s best corporate export. In independent form, SAB would continue 
to flourish because it can look forward to decades of growth in Africa. It 
deserves a better fate than being thrown under the Budweiser steamroller for 
the sake of a few more quid on the bid price.

The Santo Domingos – let’s hope – could yet decide to say no at almost any 
price. Sadly, however, it’s odds-on that AB InBev will put up the extra cash 
and blandness will prevail. Drink responsibly, drink something else.

M&A madness may be about to hit the buffers


It has been a year when superlatives have been wheeled out in the mergers and 
acquisitions world. Shell’s takeover of BG, announced in April was, at £47bn, 
the largest deal in a decade. Anheuser Busch InBev’s public – but so far 
unrequited – courtship of brewing rival SABMiller would be the largest-ever 
tie-up in the brewing business.

Deal-makers – already the smartest dressed and smoothest talkers in the City – 
have already announced more activity this year than they did for the whole of 
2014. Indeed they have never announced so valuable a string of mergers by this 
point in any year. According to Thomson Reuters the will-they-won’t-they 
brewing tussle brings the total size of deals announced so far to $3.38 
trillion (£2.2tn), a 35% increase compared to a year ago and the strongest 
year-to-date total for worldwide M&A since records began in 1980.

Why this flurry of mergers? Interest rates are low, so it is cheap to borrow 
to finance deals. The environment for growth in the business world is also 
tough, so buying a rival from which costs can be axed is an easier way to 
generate returns.

Can it go on? The big investment banks in the US, Goldman Sachs and its 
rivals, start to report their third-quarter results this week. There may well 
be updates on their “pipeline”; that is, the number of companies they know are 
thinking about tie-ups but yet to go public with their intentions. They may be 
able to say that it looks strong for the next quarter or so (and it is a brave 
corporate financier who tells his bosses that his pipeline is running dry).

But in reality the M&A race may soon start to lose its legs. An interest-rate 
rise anticipated on both sides of the Atlantic will start to make it harder to 
finance deals. This has also been a year in which deals have failed to 
materialise: RSA is still on the shelf after Zurich Insurance failed to table a 
formal offer and, to be clear, AB InBev has not yet managed to catch SABMiller. 
For now, though, the corporate financiers look to be on track for bumper 
Christmas-time bonuses.

We need brickies, not bonuses


There are many explanations offered by housebuilders for why they’re not 
building enough homes – planning, nimbies, not enough bricks, and not enough 
brickies. An unexpected 4.3% fall in construction output in August, revealed on 
Friday, was blamed partly on skills shortages. Away from the building site, 
housebuilding bosses are trousering an unprecedented cash bonanza. Five 
executives at Berkeley recently shared £42m, with chief executive Tony Pidgley 
getting £23m. A new scheme for the top five bosses could pay out £500m in the 
next five years.

Jeff Fairburn, the boss at Persimmon – where 40% of buyers use help-to-buy 
subsidies – also has a bonus scheme that could pay out £100m by 2021.

Given the cross-party agreement to build more homes, running a housebuilder 
looks like a licence to print money for the foreseeable future. Couldn’t more 
of that cash be invested in training brickies, chippies and plasterers, and a 
bit less on bosses’ pay?
 