
A fight for control of the world's beer industry appeared on the verge of 
breaking out as UK-basedSABMiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller>, the world's second-largest 
brewer, became the latest London-listed company to be eyed up for takeover.

Shares in the maker of Peroni, Grolsch and Miller Lite soared on the London 
stock exchange by almost 10% on Monday, pushing the company's value up to £55bn 
as traders sensed it had become more vulnerable to a takeover by its larger 
rival, Anheuser-Busch InBev, the owner of Budweiser.

The frenzy followed the collapse of SAB's efforts to buy rival Heineken – a 
deal that had been viewed by the City as a possible defence against a foreign 
takeover.

In what appeared to be an unambiguous rejection of SAB's approach to Heineken, 
the Dutch company said: "The Heineken family has informed SABMiller … of its 
intention to preserve the heritage and identity of Heineken as an independent 
company. The Heineken family and Heineken NV's management are confident that 
the company will continue to deliver growth and shareholder value."

The snub immediately revived speculation that SAB would become a takeover 
target itself, especially as one of the potential barriers to it being 
swallowed by its larger rival had been removed.

And the Wall Street Journal reported that AB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> was talking to banks 
about raising finance for an acquisition, citing a possible £75bn price tag.

Eddy Hargreaves, an analyst with investment bank Canaccord Genuity, wrote in a 
note to clients: "The press leak and seeming misjudgment by SABMiller in making 
its approach put SABMiller's management in an uncomfortable position. The 
Heineken move appears motivated to a significant degree by defensive thinking – 
not necessarily at the top of its shareholders' agenda. That SABMiller's 
inorganic options have been so publicly lessened puts [AB InBev] in an even 
stronger position, should it choose to make a move on SABMiller."

A tie-up between the world's two largest brewers has been rumoured for years, 
but the speculation has been revived by the surge in international mergers this 
year. The Journal added that AB InBev was not in active discussions with 
SABMiller, but was attempting to line up financing before making a formal 
approach. Both companies declined to comment.

However, other analysts said SABMiller might now turn its attention on trying 
to take over Castel, the 80%-family owned French beer and wine group, in which 
it already owns a 20% stake.

Jonathan Fyfe, an analyst at Mirabaud Securities, said such a deal would 
require taking on significant debt for SAB: "It would be quite a big deal for 
SAB to take control of [Castel]. It would involve leveraging up, which might 
put [AB] InBev off."

SABMiller declined to comment on its future intentions, but a company insider 
said: "We look at a lot of things a lot of the time. We have a corporate 
finance team looking at these things all the time. It may be that there is a 
further acquisition on the horizon, maybe not. But it will have to be 
value-enhancing for shareholders."

Bankers say a merger with SABMiller would help fix AB InBev's reliance on the 
US, which is suffering from a slowdown in beer drinking. SABMiller operates in 
many fast-growing markets – especially in its home market of Africa where its 
rumoured suitor is virtually unknown.

The origins of SABMiller "lie in the Johannesburg gold rush of 1886", the 
company's corporate history says, as "digging for gold under Africa's sun was 
thirsty work, and enterprising brewers seized the opportunity to refresh the 
booming population".

Following the collapse of apartheid, the company acquired 10 breweries in six 
countries over three years. In 1999, it switched the primary listing for its 
shares from Johannesburg to London to improve its access to international 
markets and raise capital to fuel further expansion.
 