
Tonight, Radio 1 dance music DJ Annie Mac arrives in Nottingham for the third 
of 18 club nights she's hosting in cities across the UK over the next couple of 
months. To celebrate the tour - or, indeed, to drum up interest in it - the 
"Queen of the Mash-up" has set up a new website,anniemacpresents.com 
<http://www.anniemacpresents.com>, from which she's currently offering a free 
10-song MP3 mixtape (unusually, you don't even need to register to get it). The 
mix kicks off with a terrific mash of MIA and Salt-N-Pepa, before surging 
though half an hour of strident electro which is obscure enough to make Mac 
look cool, but uplifting enough to get you bouncing around your kitchen. As 
such, the mix certainly serves as a fitting advert for Mac's party-starting 
abilities. But it's worth downloading even if your nightclub days are long gone.

Also out on the road this week are Elbow, who are still surfing a wave of good 
feeling (and increased sales) following their Mercury prize win. That victory 
has prompted Dutch websiteFabchannel.com <http://www.fabchannel.com> to put 
their film of Elbow's June gig at Amsterdam's Paradiso back on their front 
page, and the 100-minute show is very much deserving of the renewed attention. 
Not only do Elbow deliver a gorgeous, rousing performance, but a mid-set fault 
with the band's piano forces singer Guy Garvey into several minutes of 
"spontaneous frontmanship", during which he answers questions from the 
audience, then leads them in an impromptu Mexican wave. But even that is 
trumped by the crowd's surreal-but-brilliant rendition of Europe's Final 
Countdown before the encore. It clearly has the hairs standing up on Garvey's 
neck, and may well have the same effect on you.

It's not often these days that something appears online which is so downright 
impressive that it slightly boggles your mind. But audio-video mash-up artists 
Eclectic Method have achieved just that with their latest project. The 
London-based trio have long been at the forefront of the video remix scene, and 
their video for Don't Stop, the biting new single by US rockers 
Innerpartysystem, is a typically impressive collage of twisted TV clips (
tinyurl.com/ipsvideo <http://www.tinyurl.com/ipsvideo>). The difference with 
this one is an incredibly clever bit of software allowing you to instantly make 
your own remix of the video, using just your keyboard (tinyurl.com/ipsremix 
<http://www.tinyurl.com/ipsremix>). Each letter and number plays a different 
clip, enabling you to flit between Mr T, Victoria Beckham and Innerpartystem to 
create your own unique version of both the video and the song. Better still, 
once you've played around for a while, you can record your masterpiece and 
share it with the world. Tea breaks don't come much more entertaining than this.
 