
Towards the end of last year I decided to move from Alliance & Leicester, as I 
felt the service was getting worse since it had become part of Santander. I 
transferred my current account to First Direct and arranged for a balance 
transfer to settle my Santander credit card, and assumed that was the end of 
the matter.

Several months later I was sent a threatening letter from a debt collection 
agency demanding money apparently owed on my Santander credit card. I hadn't 
received a credit card statement from Santander in months, and hadn't expected 
to.

Santander eventually told me that there was a residual amount of interest of a 
couple of pounds to be paid following the balance transfer, plus late charges 
each month of £25 for five months. It had been sending bills to an old address, 
even though Santander and Alliance & Leicester both had my new address; I had 
received current account statements and credit card bills there.

Eventually Santander agreed to waive the outstanding amount and to get the 
debt collection agency to stop chasing me. I asked them to send me written 
confirmation of this and they said they would.

That was five months ago. Since then, I have not received a letter and have 
now discovered that my credit report notes five missed payments on the 
Santander credit card. I was turned down for an overdraft as a result. Where do 
I stand?KD, London

If ever a decision to leave a bank was proven to be a good one, this is it. 
Sadly, your experience of Santander is not unusual. It's further proof, if any 
were required, that administrative problems caused by the merger with Alliance 
& Leicester's database continue to cause problems for A&L customers. It seems 
particularly odd that the bank would suddenly decide to start sending your 
statements to an old address. There also seems to be a bigger issue for 
customers trying to close credit card accounts. We have had several similar 
letters in recent months concerning other banks.

Even after we sent your tale to Santander, it still took weeks to get the 
matter resolved. Thankfully, this is now the case. "We have apologised to KD 
for any inconvenience caused and removed any adverse information recorded [from 
his credit file]. Furthermore, in recognition of the disappointing service he 
received we have agreed to a goodwill payment of £170," it says. You should 
have better luck at First Direct.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Bachelor & Brignall, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number.
 