
Formula One racing driver Lewis Hamilton will swap his racing helmet for a 
hard hat tomorrow as he helps his sponsor, Santander, to the front row on high 
streets up and down the country.

At an unveiling ceremony on a busy central London shopping street, Hamilton 
will help to peel off the word "Abbey" from prepared fascias to reveal the 
brand of the Spanish bank to the British public for the first time. The 
familiar bowler hats of Bradford & Bingley will also be pulled down and 
replaced with the flame-red logo used by the Spanish bank around the world.

To illustrate the significance of this event for the ambitious company, 
executive chairman Emilio Botín will brave Britain's bitter cold to join him.

For Botín, a grandfather-like figure who rules Santander with a rod of iron, 
the event will be the latest evidence of how the bank has managed to win a 
place in the hierarchy of UK high-street banking and the minds of Britons.

When Santander snapped up the troubled Abbey National in November 2004, barely 
20% of Britons had any idea about the name that dominates banking in Spain and 
has a presence in 40 countries. But now, largely due to its sponsorship of 
Hamilton, Santander is able to claim 92% awareness of its brand, one that has 
been little tarnished by the crisis that has swept the financial system in the 
UK.

After buying Abbey, Santander could claim to be the fifth-largest bank in the 
UK. It now stands in third place – behind state-backed titans Royal Bank of 
Scotland and LloydsBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group 
– in terms of deposits following the takeover of Alliance & Leicester in July 
2008 and the acquisition of the savings customers of Bradford & Bingley before 
B&B was nationalised in September 2008.

In the next fortnight, 1,000 Abbey and B&B branches will have had their own, 
no doubt lower-key, renaming ceremonies. By the end of the year, 300 or so A&L 
branches will also be sporting the Santander logo.

While Abbey, A&L and B&B together stand for hundreds of years of banking 
history, few seem ready to shed a tear for their eradication from the high 
street. The process of rebranding Abbey began 18 months ago when Santander put 
its logo alongside the Abbey name on its branches, regarded at the time as a 
sign that the bank had bigger ambitions for its global brand.

Greg Harris, lecturer in marketing at Cass Business School, says: "I don't 
think we should be sad. There is no consumer loyalty with any of these brands. 
I doubt anybody gives a monkey's."

A similar exercise was undertaken by HSBC when it replaced Midland Bank's 
golden griffin with its red and white hexagonal symbol 10 years ago. It took 
HSBC seven years to plant its name on the high street. While it has taken five 
years for Santander to replace Abbey, B&B has been removed in just 14 months.

Harris doubts that customers will care: "When Midland was rebranded by HSBC, 
nobody left."

Even the Spanish bank's own employee survey found that 90% of staff thought 
the rebranding exercise was a good idea. The tarnished brand of B&B, and to a 
lesser extent A&L, may have helped form the views of staff and clearly played a 
part in motivating the Spanish owner to impose its name over theirs.

Graham Hales, managing director of branding experts Interbrand, notes that 
since Santander has so far survived the financial crisis largely intact, its 
task has been made easier. "We see it has a good track record and that it 
hasn't been tarnished by the crisis," he says. "That probably speeded up its 
long-term [branding] plans."

From a management point of view, the rebranding exercise made sense, he says, 
given Santander's global ambitions: "It makes little sense for them to hold on 
to domestic brands."

Like HSBC, Santander is aiming for a single brand strategy – in contrast to 
RBS and Lloyds, two banks in which the taxpayer has major stakes and which are 
deploying multiple brands on the high street. RBS has NatWest branches as well 
as its own, while Lloyds' black horse stable includes Halifax and Bank of 
Scotland to name just two.

However, the government hopes that high streets will become accustomed to new 
banking names appearing in the coming years. Both Lloyds and RBS are being 
forced by Brussels to sell off swathes of branches in return for taxpayer 
support, while Northern Rock is also coming up for sale after being split into 
a "good" and "bad" bank.

Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Money took the first steps last week into 
transforming itself from a credit card and pension company into a full-blown 
deposit-taker after taking over the small private bank Church House Trust. 
Another new bank may also be created if the Financial Services Authority 
approves an application from Metro Bank, the brainchild of US entrepreneur 
Vernon Hill and veteran marketing executive Anthony Thomson. Former banking 
analyst Sandy Chen, of stockbrokers Panmure Gordon, is also devising plans to 
create his own new high-street bank.

Hales reckons that the willingness of Britons to accept HSBC and Santander 
shows that the country is no longer fixated by domestic brands. This might lure 
foreign banks into any bidding wars that develop for the branches being sold by 
Lloyds and RBS or for Northern Rock.

But some have doubts about the likelihood of Santander being joined by new 
competitors on the high street quickly. Ian Gordon, banks analyst at Exane BNP 
Paribas, said: "I'm sceptical about the near-term competitive interest."

While a number of international players – such as National Australia Bank, 
Bank of China and Spain's BBVA – as well as Santander have been cited as 
possible suitors for the branches which RBS and Lloyds are obliged to sell over 
the next four years, Gordon doubts that there will be a great deal of immediate 
action. Furthermore, he believes, customers will not feel any benefit.

"The future I see is of high prices and limited competition," he said. "The 
forces of pricing tension which used to exist in the UK market disappeared with 
Northern Rock and Halifax."

A family affair


Santander and Royal Bank of Scotland were often compared to one another before 
the banking crisis. Both had strong leaders with a passion for takeovers. The 
lavish office complex RBS's former chief executive Sir Fred Goodwin had built 
near Edinburgh's airport was widely believed to have been modelled on the mini 
village created by Santander as its headquarters.

When Dutch bank ABN Amro ran into trouble, they worked together, along with 
Fortis, on a joint bid. While they wonthe takeover, their fortunes diverged. 
RBS had to be rescued by the UK taxpayer while Santander became the bank to 
which the government turned when it needed a solution for failing mortgage 
lender Bradford & Bingley.

While Goodwin is disgraced, Botín, 75, is still at the helm of Santander, 
which vies to be Europe's largest bank along with HSBC. It developed a 
reputation for stability while the industry was collapsing and earned laurels 
as one of the survivors of the banking meltdown.

This does not mean it is without controversy. Its management is dominated by 
Botín, whose father, grandfather and great-grandfather were all bankers. He 
rose to the top of Santander after a power struggle following a messy merger 
that sparked corruption charges, of which he was cleared.

His family is closely associated with Santander even though they own just 4% 
of the shares. His daughter, Ana Patricia Botín, is widely regarded as his 
likely successor – a move that would be unthinkable at any UK bank.
 