
Banco Santander could float part of its rapidly growing UK division – which 
includes the former Abbey, Bradford & Bingley and Alliance & Leicester – if it 
ends up buying the 300 bank branches of Williams & Glyn's that theRoyal Bank of 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> has 
been forced by the EU to put up for sale.

Other options include seeking finance from the debt markets, through a big 
loan subscribed by several banks, or through a share exchange with other 
investors, it is understood. But the process to sell the business-focused RBS 
branch network – a move forced by the European Union after the government 
bailout of the taxpayer-owned bank – is still in its "very early days," a 
source told the Guardian. Neither Santander nor UBS, which is managing the 
sale, declined to comment.

Speculation about a possible deal has been sparked by comments by Santander's 
chief executive, Alfredo Sáenz, last week in Madrid that "there's still much to 
be done in Britain". However, Sáenz also said the bank did not have any plans 
to float its British unit, which is now selling about half of all new mortgages 
in the UK.

Bankers and investors have speculated about a flotation of the UK division 
after the successful partial stock market listing of Santander's Brazilian unit 
last year. The sale contributed €1.4bn (£1.2bn) to the bank's €8.9bn profit in 
2009, which was also driven by strong growth in the UK, the chairman, Emilio 
Botín, said in Madrid.

Contrary to press reports, it is understood that Santander has not contacted 
its shareholders to test the idea of a partial flotation of the UK unit. The 
business posted annual profits of £1.5bn last year, up 30% from 2008, after 
aggressive expansion and as brand awareness grew through its red logo and 
sponsorships such as Formula 1 driver Lewis Hamilton. An average valuation of 
ten times the company's profits would value the business at £15bn.Buying the 
300-strong former Williams & Glyn's branch network would lift Santander's share 
of Britain's small business market, which stands at about 3%, well behind its 
stake of about 11% of the residential mortgage market. Santander is now 
Britain's third-largest bank, in terms of deposits, after RBS and LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group.

The Madrid-based bank, which has rapidly grown in the UK after the acquisition 
of Abbey National and parts of Alliance & Leicester and Bradford & Bingley, has 
expanded internationally over the past decade, reducing its dependence on 
Spain, which now only accounts for about 25% of its profits. The country's 
shrinking economy and 19% unemployment has lifted the bad loans ratio to more 
than 3% and is expected to continue doing so as the economy still deteriorates.

The UK market now provides 16% of the group's profits, the third largest, 
after Spain and Brazil.

The bank expects double-digit growth in Britain this year, pushed by a 
recovering economy, and through "opportunities that may arise," Botín said.
 