
With the bright lights, colourful gifts and jolly presence of Father Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, Santa’s grottos are a 
seasonal favourite for families across the UK. But not all children are able to 
enjoy them.

For thousands of children in Britain diagnosed with autism, the trip to sit on 
Santa’s knee can be a frightening mix of huge crowds and loud noises, a charity 
has said.

This year, dozens of autism-friendly Santa’s grottos have opened around the 
UK, launched by parents who want their children to be able to join in a magical 
part of Christmas without feeling distressed.

Instead of the huge queues, which can induce panic in some children with 
autism, the grottos have scheduled appointments or host only small groups. 
There are no flashing lights, Santa has been trained and the loud music has 
been replaced with a sensory room where the children can relax.

Jo-Ann D’Costa-Manuel, founder of the charity Autism Parent Empower 
<http://www.autismparentempower.org/#about-us>, said more than a thousand 
parents had contacted her to say they were thrilled about herlaunch of an 
autism-friendly Santa’s grotto 
<http://www.itv.com/news/meridian/update/2016-11-25/santas-special-gift-to-children-with-autism/>
 in Crawley, Sussex.


“For some families this will be the first time they will get the opportunity 
to experience the magic of Santa with their child,” she said. “For other 
families, who feel extremely isolated and misunderstood, they are comforted 
that awareness and acceptance is now unfolding into the mainstream and 
nationwide, too. A parent contacted me to say this was the first time in nine 
years she was able to take her son [to the grotto] – now that is what Christmas 
spirit is truly all about.”

Lynn Westerman Holt said taking her 11-year-old son, Alexander, to the local 
Santa’s grotto was a “disaster” for years. “The noise of the crowd, the heat of 
the crowd, the smell of the perfume, the flashing lights. That’s when you see 
the meltdown,” she said.

There is also anecdotal evidence that the autism-friendly grottos may be 
helping some children who find it difficult to communicate. Westerman Holt, who 
helped set up anautism-friendly grotto in the Yorkshire town of Wetherby 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/news/autism-friendly-santa-s-grotto-opens-at-stockeld-park-1-8254434>
, said she cried when Alexander – who has nonverbal autism – was able to talk 
to Father Christmas.


“Although he’s now 11 and neurotypical 11-year-olds probably don’t believe in 
Father Christmas any more, he almost didn’t have any concept of Christmas until 
he was six or seven,” she said. “Now he’s getting the real wonder and magic of 
it. He believes he’s really talking to Father Christmas.”

Westerman Holt helped launch her local autism-friendly grotto three years ago 
with the charityAutism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> Angels. 
What started with 20 children had this year grown to 100, some of whom 
travelled more than two hours to visit Santa.


She added: “When you’re the parent of a child with autism you do feel very 
isolated because Christmas is supposed to be a really magical time. It’s 
supposed to be like it is on the TV and the movies and everyone’s playing happy 
families. That heightens the difference between your family and the typical 
family – it is quite lonely and it is heartbreaking.”

Kerrie Stephenson set up a similar Santa’s grotto in York after her 
three-year-old son, Jack, was diagnosed with autism earlier this year. About 45 
children attended and the idea proved so popular that the parents are planning 
autism-friendly Easter egg hunts and a Halloween event – without the scary 
costumes.

“I had parents crying, telling me it was the most relaxed the children had 
been, people weren’t judged,” she said. “I’ve had lots of parents saying to me 
it was awful queueing, their child screaming, too many people dressed up. We 
didn’t have any music on and the only person dressed up was Santa.”

Daniel Cadey, autism access development manager at the National Autistic 
Society, said: “It is really heartening to see people making autism-friendly 
Santa’s grottos. Like anyone else, autistic people and their families want the 
opportunity to join in Christmas festivities. But many children on the autism 
spectrum rely on routine and their sensory sensitivities mean they can find the 
busy, loud and unpredictable environment of Santa’s grottos disorientating and 
overwhelming.

“Our Too Much Information campaign 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/get-involved/tmi/map.aspx?gclid=COv44_HL_tACFRW3Gwod6CIEtw>
 highlights the need for greater public understanding of autism, so autistic 
people and their families aren’t left socially isolated. The loud music and 
crowds – even the look and feel of lots of decorations – can make public spaces 
during the holiday period particularly overwhelming, so it’s fantastic to see 
businesses and individuals taking it on themselves to make the often small 
adjustments necessary to create autism-friendly alternatives that allow 
autistic children and their families the chance to take part in their local 
Christmas cheer.”
 