
Ashley Giles's first move as England's white-ball supremo, or at least the 
first that cannot be cloaked in the fog of rotation, has been to ditch a 
wicketkeeper in favour of a county team-mate who is second-choice with the 
gloves back home. "It has been slightly awkward," admitted Somerset's Jos 
Buttler, gamely.

Choices on tour are limited, and Kieswetter's abject form left him with little 
credit in his account but it feels like a pivotal time for the position itself, 
so secure in the Test side, so fluid everywhere else.

It's a matter of philosophy, the future of wicketkeeping in the post-Gilchrist 
era, and Giles appears to be thinking quite conventionally about it. Someone 
like Buttler is the acme of this approach, a guy who is essentially a batsman 
with a second string to his bow. England have a raft of them that they can 
argue over, from Jonny Bairstow to Kieswetter, while they apparently lack the 
desire to solve the conundrum of their one true thoroughbred, Matt Prior.

But, as this blog has long held, 50-over cricket is dead; it just hasn't 
finished threshing about on the hook yet. It's in the T20 game that Giles's 
approach will have longer-term implications, and there's an emerging argument 
(well from me at least) that a complete reappraisal of the wicketkeeper's role 
is coming.

Like Duckworth Lewis, it's simply an equation of resources. T20 is a game for 
specialisation, because unlike Test and ODI cricket, those resources are rarely 
exhausted in the time allocated.

The maths goes something like this: at the start of each game, the 
wicketkeeper is the only specialist position guaranteed to be able to affect a 
minimum of 50% of the match while using their primary skill (the 20 overs for 
which they keep). A bowler has 10% (four of 40 overs), the two opening batsmen 
an unlikely maximum of 50%, the other batters a sliding downward scale from 
there.

Accepting that almost everyone can field well, and that all-rounders increase 
their overall percentages by batting and bowling, it's easy to see that the 
most valuable player in these simple terms of opportunity would be an opening 
bat that can bowl (Chris Gayle, perhaps), although the occasions on which even 
the transcendent Jamaican carries his bat occur infrequently.

The wicketkeeping position can therefore be reimagined as an attacking option 
for a fielding side. It's an opportunity to reduce the effectiveness of the 
batsman by keeping him in his crease against seam bowling, thus reducing his 
scoring options. While it's hard to quantify exactly how many runs might be 
saved by a gloveman capable of standing up to the seamers, it is a move that 
would challenge many of the techniques of T20 batting. It might not be fanciful 
to guess that the score might be limited by 20-30 per innings, at least until 
batsmen adjusted in turn.

It first suggested itself in the performance of Michael Bates in the CB40 
final last season. It's easy to go into some kind of reverie when watching him 
keep; he brings back memories of Bob Taylor standing up to Ian Botham, of the 
impish skills of Alan Knott, the silken hands of Jack Russell. Hampshire have 
choked many a side with a combination of skiddy medium pace, spin and Bates 
behind the dollies.

Taylor, Knott and Russell were a different shape to the gym-produced, 
identikit bodies that burst forth from the tight-shirted present. The demands 
of the job mitigate against the physique needed for power hitting, and a 
specialist keeper might have to be regarded a little like a bowler, with his 
main contribution coming in the field. But without running the stats, it would 
be interesting to know how often the seventh batter in a lineup has done the 
job when six others could not.

Bates is an obvious choice for Giles and England. A less immediate but 
nonetheless intriguing selection for a county side might beSarah Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sarah-taylor>. She is lithe and athletic, 
attributes that are evident in her keeping. The debate about her lack of power 
as a batter has rather blindsided the fact that it is motor skill and movement, 
rather than strength, that make a great wicketkeeper. It's in circumstances 
like these, a short game where a single skill can have a disproportionate 
effect, that a cricketer such as Taylor might one day fit.
 