
Within moments of Laurent Gbagbo's capture, French president Nicolas Sarkozy 
telephoned Gbagbo's rival,Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, the internationally 
recognised winner of last year's election.

Initial reports suggested that French troops had carried out the arrest, but 
they were immediately denied in Paris: French troops had not arrested Gbagbo, 
he had been handed over to them by his own presidential guard.

Then more reports: Ouattara's forces had arrested Gbagbo. And finally: French 
forces helped the rebels, but no French soldier had set so much as one boot on 
Gbagbo's lawn.

The way Paris tells it, French and United Nations forces laid siege to 
Gbagbo's residence and reduced part of the building to rubble with tank and 
helicopter missiles in an attempt to take out "heavy weaponry".

Then they stopped and waited for Ouattara's forces to go in. This scenario, if 
true, is the best Sarkozy could hope for: the French had saved the day but had 
not been seen to deliver the finalcoup de grâce, which could have prompted 
charges of neo-colonialism.

In recent weeks Sarkozy has miraculously recovered from France's diplomatic 
disasters in NorthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. His 
foreign policy had been dismissed as "diplomacy without courage" after Paris 
initially offered to help crush unrest in Tunisia.

With a presidential election a year off – and his popularity ratings at 
all-time low – Sarkozy had to do something. First he led the way into Libya, 
driving through a UN resolution that would let French warplanes loose and make 
everyone else – except perhaps David Cameron – look indecisive.

Emboldened, France obtained a similar UN resolution allowing its Operation 
Licorne forces in theIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>
 to act "in defence of civilians", which in practice meant support for Ouattara.

Licorne was beefed up to 1,400 troops, who immediately took control of Abidjan 
airport and began patrolling the city while French "intelligence operatives" 
were rumoured to be in the country.

Sarkozy was said to be in regular contact with Ouattara – over whose marriage 
he officiated when mayor of Neuilly – and reportedly managed the conflict in 
minute detail. It was Sarkozy who reportedly told Ouattara to hold back the 
attack on Gbagbo for fear of turning him into a martyr, and Sarkozy who 
allegedly refused to allow French troops to take control of Abidjan's bridges, 
even though it would help the evacuation of civilians. Photographs of the 
French flag flying over the Charles de Gaulle bridge at the heart of a former 
colonial capital would not, he decided, send the right message to Africa.

At each step, Paris insisted military action was preceded by a formal demand 
from the UN for French forces to act, and bothFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and the UN insisted their aim was 
not to overthrow Gbagbo. But last night the big question over Gbagbo's arrest 
remained, as Le Monde asked: "At what point did French forces intervene?"

The French ambassador in Abidjan, Jean-Marc Simon, insisted that "at no 
moment" did any French troops enter "into the gardens or the presidential 
residence". The paper quoted a defence ministry source admitting the French and 
UN forces had been "supporting the operation" to arrest 65-year-old Gbagbo.

The point over who actually arrested Gbagbo may seem pedantic, but Sarkozy has 
been treading a fine line between being damned for intervening – accused of 
neo-colonialism and of attempting to boost his domestic ratings with 
battlefield successes – or damned for sitting back and doing nothing. Inaction 
is not Sarkozy's default position – particularly in the Ivory Coast, which is 
home to 15,000 French citizens.

Le Figaro has suggested Sarkozy's war adventures could indeed be a 
vote-winner: "The president of the republic thinks the French experience a 
certain pride in seeing their country play an important role on the world scene 
and that this role is recognised outside its borders. It's good for morale," 
the paper said.
 