 It was the twentieth century's most baffling aviation mystery. On 2 July 1937, 
Amelia Earhart disappeared in the Pacific while trying to fly round the world. 
US warships were dispatched to find her but she was never seen again.
Her vanishing shocked the West. Earhart was the most famous woman of her 
generation and her disappearance triggered a mass of conspiracy theories: she 
had been killed by the Japanese; she had died on a spying mission.

But now researchers - using satellite images - say they may have detected her 
plane's wreckage off the uninhabited Nikumaroro Island in the southwestern 
Pacific Republic of Kiribati.

Next month an expedition by the International Group for Historic Airplane 
Recovery (TIGHAR) will try to link the wreck with Earhart and show she died on 
the island. 'I have visited Nikumaroro and I am sure Earhart died there,' 
Richard Gillespie, the group's executive director, told The Observer .

'However, we need to find an "any idiot artefact" - a piece of evidence so 
convincing even an idiot will accept it as proof of her death there. A bit of 
her plane would do nicely. Unfortunately it seems to be lying in an extremely 
dangerous reef. It is shark city out there.'

Glamorous and articulate, Earhart became the first woman pilot to fly the 
Atlantic in 1932 after Lindbergh's great 1927 flight. She remains the most 
famous woman aviator, though this rests as much on the efforts of her husband, 
the master promoter George Palmer Putnam, as on her piloting. 'She was good, 
but she wasn't in Lindbergh's league,' said Gillespie.

In 1937, Earhart - with Fred Noonan, an experienced navigator - set off in a 
Lockheed Electra to try to circle the globe along the equator. Their route from 
Miami took them to South America, Africa and the Sahara, India, Southeast Asia 
and Australia before they reached New Guinea. Here they faced a 2,500-mile jump 
to Howland Island, where the cutter Itasca was waiting to refuel their plane. 
They never arrived.

On 2 July, Itasca's radio operators heard Earhart's radio calls, but their 
replies were clearly not received by Earhart. The ship raised the alarm and the 
battleship USS Colorado was dispatched from Honolulu on the orders of President 
Roosevelt.

Over the next few days fresh radio signals were received, suggesting she had 
landed safely. But searches by planes launched from the Colorado found nothing. 
On 18 July, the search was called off. The plane had gone down at sea and sunk 
without trace, it was declared. The supposed distress calls must have been 
hoaxes.

But for the past 12 years Gillespie and colleagues have battled to prove 
Earhart did not perish at sea. They conclude she missed Howland Island and flew 
on to Nikumaroro, then known as Gardner Island.

'The Colorado's planes flew over the island and pilots could see recent signs 
of habitation,' said Gillespie. 'But they could see no signs of humans. 
Nevertheless, I am sure she ended up there.'

Later reports spoke of aircraft wreckage lying on a reef, and subsequently a 
grave was found on Nikumaroro. Bones were taken to Fiji, where a doctor 
declared they belonged to a European male. But these bones have since been 
lost, while experts who have studied the doctor's notes say they could also 
have been a woman's. 'It could have been Noonan, it could have been Earhart,' 
says Gillespie.

In the 1990s Gillespie's group visited the region several times and pinpointed 
Nikumaroro as the most probable site of Earhart's crash. However, it is remote, 
covered in thick shrub, has temperatures that soar to over 100 degrees, and has 
no fresh water.

'She and Noonan could have found a way to collect rainwater, and there were 
coconuts,' said Gillespie. 'But the coral is lethal. A cut would have been 
deadly without antibiotics.'

He concludes Earhart and Noonan survived their crash but succumbed to injury 
or possibly poisoning by local fish which are toxic. Noonan died not far from 
the crash, while Earhart perished on the southeast of the island.

But not everyone in the Earhart industry agrees. 'None of us has ever ever 
felt she was there,' said Rollin Reineck, of theAmelia Earhart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amelia-earhart> Society which believes she 
was captured by Japanese.

Gillespie remains confident, however. 'This new data gives us a real lead. If 
we can bring back a bit of plane, we will have finally proved what happened to 
Amelia.'

robin.mckie@observer.co.uk <mailto:robin.mckie@observer.co.uk> 

www.tighar.org <http://www.tighar.org>
 