
Under the stewardship of vice-chancello Professor MT Wright, Aston University 
ensures its students have the key skills for a successful career by constantly 
updating its postgrad programmes.

The school of engineering and science, for example, is developing new courses 
in informatics and software engineering.

Aston's postgraduate programmes and research have earned the coveted grade 
five rating across all four of its academic schools.

The school offers MSc and diploma programmes where the course content is 
closely related to the work carried out by its various research departments. 
This gives its postgrad students first-hand experience of latest ideas in their 
field of study.

 Many of Aston's research activities are funded by the manufacturing sector 
and government departments which go on to recruit students from the 
university's programmes.

Aston has a decent track record for offering courses for graduates who prefer 
to learn while they earn. For example, the school of engineering and applied 
science offers an MSc in passenger transport management aimed at graduates with 
operational responsibilities in this area.

What's more, the city-centre campus is situated to offer ideal study/life 
balance, when you need a break from books.

Aston offers its postgrads, guaranteed accommodation on campus and for 
students with family responsibilities it keeps a register of local safe houses 
and flats for renting. There is also a subsidised nursery on the campus for 
students facing childcare issues.

For a copy of the postgrad prospectus contact Alison John in the marketing and 
communication department at Aston University, Aston Triangle, Birmingham B4 7 
ET. (0121 359 3611 ext 4317).

 Nick says: "Apart from its eye catching endorsement by the Research 
Assessment Exercise (RAE), its reputation for cutting-edge research to solve 
real life problems equips students with powerful qualifications to tempt 
potential employers. Small wonder Aston has one of the highest postgrad 
employment records in the UK. In a survey published at the end of last year, 
87% of its postgrads entered employment within six months of graduation 
compared to the national average of 83%."

 Nick Pandya 

 (nick.pandya@theguardian.com)
 