
Research agencies have ordered UK scientists to improve the way they use 
animals in experiments. Too often poorly designed projects – to test new 
medicines for strokes, cancer and other conditions – have produced meaningless 
results and wasted animals’ lives, the organisations have warned.

In some cases, researchers – desperate to control the costs of their work – 
have underestimated the number of animals needed to test a new medicine. As a 
result, their tiny studies have lacked the power to pinpoint biological effects 
in the drugs under scrutiny. These unreliable results mean the lives of the 
animals involved have been wasted, along with scientists’ time and resources. 
The over-use of animals in experiments has also led to unnecessary loss of 
their lives.

The problem of poorly designed studies has been under investigation for two 
years and culminated, last week, in Research Councils UK – the umbrella group 
for the councils that fund UK research –announcing changes to its guidelines  
<http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/media/announcements/150415/>for those carrying out 
research using animals. Scientists will now have to show their work will not 
only produce physiological insights but will also generate statistically robust 
data. If not, they will lose their funding.

“There has been an increasing awareness that some animal experiments are not 
sufficiently robust. These guidelines should therefore be welcomed, although 
they have taken a long time to be introduced,” said neuroscientist Malcolm 
Macleod of Edinburgh University.

In 2013, 4.12 million scientific procedures on animals – mostly rats and mice 
– were started in Great Britain. Half involved breeding genetically modified 
animals. The other half involved experiments on unmodified animals, of which 
58% were carried out for fundamental research, 26% for human medicine and 8% 
for veterinary purposes.

Many of these are done to test drugs before human trials are launched. 
However, it takes a fairly large number of animals to reveal whether a drug is 
having a pharmacological effect, said Macleod. “In a typical £300,000 project – 
say to test a stroke drug – about a third of funds goes on equipment, a third 
on salaries and a third on animals. To keep costs down – and there is constant 
pressure to do so by agencies – you might try to limit numbers of animals. But 
that means the power of your research to pinpoint a real biological effect is 
limited. Often your results are produced purely by chance. However, to make 
your research more robust – to raise its statistical power from 50% to 80% – 
you would have to double the number of animals you use and so increase its 
cost, in our example, by another £100,000.”

The problem of poorly designed experiments was identified in a recent survey 
of scientific papers which showed details of design and statistical analysis 
were sometimes inadequate, said immunologist Professor Paul Kaye of York 
University. “The new guidance will allow scientists to demonstrate to funders 
they have a full understanding of the issues involved in designing and 
analysing complex experiments involving animals.”

Mark Prescott, head of research policy for the UK National Centre for the 
Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research, said the 
guidelines represented a change for the scientific community. “Yes, you can use 
animals in experiments, but no more than necessary – and no fewer. It is 
ethically questionable to get the numbers wrong either way.”

Wendy Jarrett, chief executive of Understanding Animal Research, said: “The 
scientific community needs to use the latest data in order to make sure studies 
are appropriately powered. In some cases, this means fewer animals can be used, 
but sometimes it will lead to more being used in order to ensure we get 
meaningful results.”

This point was stressed by Penny Hawkins of the RSPCA. “It is good that this 
problem has been put right but bad that it took so long to do so. Animals have 
suffered unnecessarily and patients have been let down because public money has 
been wasted on worthless research. We now need to see how robustly the agencies 
follow up these new guidelines and ensure scientists comply with them.”
 