
In what could be a fresh chapter in the never-ending story of the search for 
eternal youth, scientists are to tinker with people’s blood in the hope of 
slowing down the ageing process and preventing age-related diseases.

Researchers in California plan to launch a clinical trial of the radical – and 
highly experimental – approach in the next six months, after a small study in 
mice found the treatment had promise.


People who take part in the trial will have their blood passed through a 
machine that resets abnormal levels of proteins seen in older blood. The 
scientists believe these high levels of certain proteins can hamper the growth 
and maintenance of healthy body tissues, and so contribute to their 
deterioration in old age.


Plans for the trial emerged as scientists announced the results of the animal 
study, which was part-funded byCalico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/11/-sp-live-forever-extend-life-calico-google-longevity>
, Google’s life extension company. The study showed that infusions of old blood 
reduced the growth of fresh liver and brain cells in young mice and impaired 
their performance in a strength test.


The same series of experiments found evidence that infusions of young blood 
could speed up muscle repair in older animals. But Irina Conboy, who led the 
work at the University of California, Berkeley, said the improvement could be 
due the dilution of old blood in the animals, rather than the young blood 
having rejuvenating properties itself.


The work is the latest in a string of studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/04/can-we-reverse-ageing-process-young-blood-older-people>
 to show that molecules in blood may shift the apparent pace of ageing in 
various bodily tissues. But while much of the previous work has focused on the 
rejuvenating effects of proteins lurking in young blood, the Berkeley team 
conclude that abnormal levels of proteins in old blood are more important.


“These proteins are made by all the tissues in your body every day,” Conboy 
told the Guardian. “When they are present at low levels, they are important, 
and you cannot live without them. But with ageing their levels become skewed. 
Some of them go up, and some go down. So the rational approach is not to give 
people young blood, but to normalise the levels of these key molecules.”


Can we reverse the ageing process by putting young blood into older people? – 
Podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2015/aug/24/can-we-reverse-ageing-process-young-blood-long-read-podcast>
Asked about her hopes for a treatment, Conboy said, “If you can prevent 
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and type 2 diabetes, you pretty much 
provide many more decades of healthy active life to everybody.”

One scientist who read the study was not convinced by the findings. Tony 
Wyss-Coray at Stanford University has set up a clinical trial to investigate 
whether injections of young blood plasma can help people with early stage 
Alzheimer’s disease. He said he doubted the results because of the statistics 
the team use, and the fact that the studies draw on only four pairs of mice for 
each experiment.

In the past, scientists have investigated what happens when blood is swapped 
between old and young animals by conjoining them in a surgical operation known 
as parabiosis. Because the animals share a blood supply, the procedure allows 
scientists to look for effects of young blood on old animals and vice versa. 
But mice that are conjoined in this way share more than a blood supply. For 
example, an older mouse attached to a younger one benefits from the latter’s 
more youthful organs too.


In the latest study, reported in Nature Communications 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/NCOMMS13363>, Conboy’s team came up 
with a new way to transfer blood between animals without conjoining them. 
Instead of surgically attaching the animals, their blood is drawn through a 
tube by a computer-controlled pump and directly transfused into the recipient 
animal.

The Berkeley team is now working on a device that can filter out high levels 
of proteins from old human blood and so reset them to more youthful levels. “If 
you can remove key inhibitor molecules from the blood of an old person and then 
return that blood into them, that could be immediately therapeutic,” Conboy 
said.

“We are developing ideas for clinical trials to see what happens if you 
normalise levels of one key protein we think is inhibitory,” she added. “We 
hope to start in six months and have results in three years.

“Right now our health declines after about seven decades. We are pretty much 
hoping to extend the productive plateau, where you’re not necessarily the world 
champion in swimming or running marathons, but you can continue for a few more 
decades without any critical illnesses.”
 