
Nose-dwelling microbes produce an antibiotic which kills the hospital superbug 
MRSA, scientists have discovered. The finding suggests that the human body 
might harbour a rich variety of bacteria that could be harnessed in the fight 
against antibiotic resistance.

Antibiotic resistance is a growing cause for concern, with experts warning of 
an impending “apocalyptic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jan/23/antibiotic-resistant-diseases-apocalyptic-threat>
 situation in which patients die following routine surgery because of 
infections that can no longer be treated. Among the superbugs of concern are 
strains of Staphylococcus aureus that are resistant to a number of antibiotics; 
these strains are known as MRSA.

Antibiotic resistance is not theoretical: the threat is real and immediate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/11/antibiotics-drug-resistance-is-not-theoretical-threat-real-immediate>
Now scientists say they have discovered a bacterium lurking in the nose that 
fights MRSA by producing its own antibiotic.

Andreas Peschel, co-author of the study from the University of Tübingen, 
described the discovery as “totally unexpected”, as most antibiotics in use 
have come from soil bacteria.


The finding, Peschel adds, opens up a new preventative approach to tackling 
bacterial infections. One possibility, he says, is that harmless bacteria could 
be genetically modified to produce the new antibiotic, and then introduced to 
patients carryingS.aureus. That, the authors note, could prove a boon, as 
resistance is growing towards existing antibiotics used to kill off MRSA in 
patients awaiting surgery.

Published in the journal Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature18634> by scientists from the 
University of Tübingen, the research reveals how the new antibiotic was 
discovered following the analysis of nasal swabs from 37 individuals.


With around 30% of humans carrying S.aureus in their nostrils, increasing 
their risk of infection after surgery or illness, the team scanned bacteria 
from the swabs to explore whether other nasal-dwelling microbes were putting up 
a fight.

The hunt is on for new antibiotics | Jenny Rohn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2015/feb/19/hunt-for-new-antibiotics-outside-the-lab>
The results reveal that a strain of the bacterium Staphylococcus lugdunensis 
can kill offS.aureus, even when it is outnumbered ten to one. That, the 
researchers found, is down to the production of an antibiotic, named lugdunin. 
Moreover, further investigations revealed that the genes necessary for the 
production of lugdunin appear to be present in all strains ofS.lugdunensis.

“It’s really the first human-associated bacterium where the whole species is 
able to produce such an antibiotic,” said Bernhard Krismer, another co-author 
of the study.

As well as killing off a range of S.aureus strains, the new antibiotic 
defeated a host of other bacteria, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, which 
can cause meningitis and bronchitis among other conditions. Lugdunin also 
killed strains ofEnterococcus, a bacteria that can cause inflammation of the 
heart, urinary tract infections and bloodstream infections, that are resistant 
to the antibiotic vancomycin.. What’s more, when applied to mice, the new 
antibiotic was found to clear or reduce skin infections ofS.aureus.

To probe whether humans carrying S.lugdunensis had a lower chance of carrying 
S.aureusas well, the team collected a further 187 nasal swabs from hospital 
patients. The results revealed that the percentage of patients who carried
S.aureuswas almost six times lower for those who carried S.lugundensis (17 
patients) than for those who did not.


“This [research] is showing that same competition that happens in the soil - 
where bugs are trying to kill each other to gain space and access to niches and 
habitats - is happening in the body,” said Mark Webber, co-head of the 
Antimicrobials Research Group at the University of Birmingham, who was not 
involved in the study.

It’s time for drastic action on drug-resistant microbes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/gallery/2016/may/20/time-for-action-drug-resistant-microbes-jenny-rohn-antibiotics>
Scientists say the new research adds weight to the idea that the human body 
itself could offer up new possibilities in fight againstantibiotic resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/14/antimicrobial-resistance-greater-threat-cancer-2050-george-osborne>
. WhileS.lugundensis can itself cause infections, the authors say one approach 
would be to insert the genes for the new antibiotic into harmless bacteria 
which could then be introduced to humans. Alternatively, lugdunin itself could 
eventually be produced commercially.

But there is a drawback: the newly discovered antibiotic only kills 
gram-positive bacteria, a type of bacteria that lacks an outer cell membrane. 
“It doesn’t have any activity against gram-negative bugs, things likeE. coli,” 
said Webber. “Those are the ones that are causing most of the infections and 
are the hardest to treat.”

While Webber agrees that the new discovery could open up a fresh avenues for 
tackling antibiotic-resistance, he warns that lugdunin is “a million miles away 
from being a useful drug”, adding that antibiotics typically take decades to 
develop.

Despite the lengthy wait, the University of Tübingen has already applied for a 
patent for the new antibiotic. And there may be more discoveries to come from 
the human-dwelling bacteria, believes Peschel. “Lugdunin may be just the first 
example of such an antibiotic,” he said.

 * This article was edited on 28 July to correct a possible ambiguity. To 
clarify: only certain strains ofStaphylococcus aureus are known collectively as 
MRSA (methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus).
 