
Val McDermid <http://www.guprod.gnl/books/val-mcdermid>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
The late, great Michael Marra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/01/michael-marra>, the Bard of 
Dundee, once wrote a heartrending and witty song called "Beefheart and Bones" 
about a couple divvying up their CD collection after a breakup. It sums up how 
I've come to feel aboutScottish independence 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/politics/scottish-independence> after a long time of 
swithering (a Scots word meaning "swinging from one position to another".) For 
a long time, I couldn't make up my mind. In the "Aye, naw, mibbe" discussion, I 
was a definite "mibbe". But neither side seems able definitively to answer my 
questions about what will happen after the referendum. Will we keep the pound? 
Will we get devo max? Will we drive Trident from our waters? Will we keep the 
Windsors?

Given that, the only basis I could find for making a choice is to look at the 
track record of what the Scottish parliament has done differently from 
Westminster since we've had some power restored to us. And, overwhelmingly, I 
prefer what we've done north of the border – free prescriptions, no student 
tuition fees, social care for elderly people. So, with a degree of trepidation, 
I'm going to nail my colours to the mast of aspiration and vote "Yes".

When you realise you're in a relationship in which the two of you want 
different things, where your hopes and dreams are taking you in different 
directions, you don't hesitate because you're not sure what you're going to get 
in the divorce settlement; you make the decision and then you sort things out 
afterwards. We shouldn't be held back because of the fear that seems to be the 
major plank of the Better Together campaign. And if we don't get the Beefheart 
CD, we can always go out and buy a new copy.

Irvine Welsh <http://www.guprod.gnl/books/irvinewelsh>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
The most interesting thing about the independence referendum is how the yes 
campaign has gone from being perceived on the left as anti-British, to part of 
the vanguard of a broader populist movement to restore democracy across these 
islands. In the larger context, this is isn't surprising; the Conservatives 
have long given up even pretending to represent anybody other than society's 
elites and their cohorts, who have taken the country to the cleaners for the 
last 35 years. (Anybody who doubts this should look at the continuing flow of 
wealth from the many to the few.) Labour has also presided over this ongoing 
obscenity, while occasionally hinting that they can perhaps wring some 
begrudged concessions from those elites. This seldom, if ever, happens; the UK 
is simply not set up that way.

With its morally bankrupt party system, zero-esteemed career politicians, and 
plethora of coverups and conspiracies reaching into the heart of a seedy, 
decadent, self-serving establishment in business, politics, the media and the 
judiciary, the UK is now perceived as a failed state by many of its citizens. 
It has entrenched the entitlement of power and privilege above that of the 
aspiration to any true democracy.

But now people are thinking about the public school elites, aristocracy, City 
of London investment bankers, corporate lobbyists, and the imperialist 
warmongers, apologists and conspirators in the media, not as instruments of 
good government and a healthy democracy, but as dangerous impediments to it. 
All those will be eliminated, or their influence largely diminished, inScotland 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/uk/scotland>following a yes vote and the establishment 
of a constitution that confers genuine rights on citizens. If Scotland moves in 
that direction, I wouldn't expect England to hang around in developing a true 
grassroots democratic movement.

The yes campaign has empowered people to take control of their own destiny, 
and offered hope that they, their families and communities can have a genuine 
future. The principle is a simple one: it involves national resources going 
into education, health and housing, instead of being siphoned off into the 
offshore accounts of the super-rich or squandered on sordid overseas conflicts, 
instigated by the inadequate for the profit of their paymasters. (This is what 
they mean by "influence on the world stage".) The yes campaign deserves to 
succeed in September with a positive vote. Either way, the genie is now out of 
the bottle, and the issue, and the newly empowered citizens it has created, 
certainly will not be going away.

On a personal note, I've lived most of the last decade in Ireland and America, 
two countries that were once ruled from London. I've yet to meet a single 
person in either who is in a hurry to go back to that arrangement. OnceScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and England have freedom from the 
corrupt, imperialist and elitist setup, I can guarantee that their people will 
feel exactly the same way.

James Meek
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
The "Great" in "Great Britain" is so often taken for a boastful adjective that 
we forget it's a comparator. It doesn't mean "Excellent Britain". It means 
"great" as in "great crested newt" or "great auk" or "Greater London". We 
forget that "Great Britain" is simply the geographical name for the largest 
island of the hundreds in the British archipelago. It's our Honshu; our Java. 
Perhaps "Greater Britain" would be a clearer name, or "Big Island".

You can, and perhaps will, mark out a conceptual east-west line dividing the 
island in two, and decree that on either side of the line people will pay 
different taxes, deal with immigration in different ways, permit or not permit 
nuclear weapons. What you cannot do is physically make one island into two, or 
move the island elsewhere.

I can imagine a number of unhappy consequences of Scotland voting for 
independence in September. I can also imagine good ones. The assumption that 
political fragmentation means more nationalistic, inward-looking, 
self-aggrandising cultures in the separated nations, particularly England, 
might be wrong. What if the death of Britannia heightened awareness of the 
non-political culture that spans the entire archipelago – the islandic world?

It would be different were Scotland to be speaking a different language. But 
modern Scots hasn't been systemised in a way that makes it practical to learn 
to speak for everyday use, or to prepare Scots to accept hearing it spoken with 
a non-Scottish accent, and Ireland's experience suggests even universal Gaelic 
teaching doesn't make Gaelic a first language.

Adjacency, entwined histories, entwined families, a common language, 
vernaculars of everything from diet to architecture to sailing to hillwalking 
to drinking – there is much in common in islandic culture, like Scandanavian, 
that will transcend islandic borders.

Last year I was invited to the book festival in Dún Laoghaire, near Dublin. I 
was on stage withAL Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alkennedy>; 
two writers, brought up in Dundee, now living in London, speaking in Ireland. 
It was an islandic experience, and I found myself intoxicated by the pleasure 
of small differences. Dún Laoghaire was not quite like anywhere I had been 
before. But the way it seemed different from Brighton or Ayr was exactly the 
same as the way in which Brighton and Ayr seem different from each other. 
That's not something you change with a vote.

Richard Holloway
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
The referendum debate reminds me of those arguments for and against the 
existence of God that were such a feature of the cultural scene about 10 years 
ago. The cases offered in support of either side were rationalisations of 
convictions reached on other, usually subconscious, grounds, which is why they 
tended to fortify beliefs already held rather than make new converts; and they 
left agnostics undecided. The same thing seems to be going on here, with the 
agnostics the group likely to swing the vote, depending on which side they find 
less satisfactory on the day. I am an agnostic who has decided to vote yes, and 
what I want to do here is describe some of the factors that prompted me to that 
decision.

I agree with the priest in TS Eliot's Murder in the Cathedral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/nov/19/ts-eliot-plays-michael-billington>
 who said he saw "nothing quite conclusive in the art of temporal government". 
Economics strikes me as no more conclusive a science than theology, which is 
why I have been more irritated than enlightened by the use each side has made 
of the dismal science in the debate; but while the arguments of the yes side 
may not have persuaded me, the arguments of the no side have propelled me in 
the opposite direction. Rather than making a positive case for the union, the 
Better Together campaign has wasted its energy on attacking the idea that 
Scotland could go it alone, a tactic guaranteed to anger those of us for whom 
the question was never whether we could but whether we should.

And there has been little recognition on the unionist side that the British 
political system is broken. The major factor in my own mistrust is outrage at 
the wars we have fought in Iraq and Afghanistan for no valid moral purpose. I 
am ready to forgive politicians for getting economics wrong, but never for 
taking us into costly and unnecessary wars. Over-centralised Britain 
concentrates power in ways that are hard to challenge. I support the Catholic 
principle of subsidiarity: power should be decentralised to the maximum degree; 
and that's what the soft form of independence on offer will help us to achieve.

But even if it's a no vote on 18 September, the yes campaign has already won 
by forcing the unionists to offer Scotland significant new powers. If they had 
shown that generosity at the beginning of the campaign, history might have 
turned out to be different.

Allan Massie

There's a general impression that Scottish writers and artists are mostly in 
favour of independence. A good many certainly are. Some, likeAlasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray>and James Robertson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/14/james-robertson-land-still-profile>
, have been so for a long time. Other younger ones have perhaps been inspired 
by Gray's advice that we should imagine we are living in the first days of a 
better country. Artists for Independence are undoubtedly voicing their opinion 
more loudly, and campaigning more vigorously, than those intending to vote No.

It's also quite widely believed that the prospect first of devolution then of 
independence stimulated an artistic renaissance. There's little evidence of 
this, if only because the condition of the arts in Scotland has been no more – 
and no less – healthy and flourishing over the last three or four decades than 
over the preceding half‑century.

It's possible that the achievement of independence might prove stimulating. 
Many believe it would. But it might not. We might mirror Ireland's experience, 
where the exuberant creativity of the years of struggle for independence died 
away soon after the creation of the free state. Of course, an independent 
Scotland would not resembleDe Valera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/feb/21/archive-mr-de-valera-ousted-in-eire-1948>
's Ireland; there would be no clerical dominance, no church-inspired 
censorship. Nevertheless, the battle won, it might prove a duller place.

All this can only be speculation. One thing is clear, however. As far as the 
state's role in the arts and public provision for the arts is concerned, 
independence would make very little, if any, difference. The one area that 
would be affected is broadcasting, where breaking away from the BBC to 
establish a Scottish BC might conceivably offer new opportunities for writers, 
film-makers and musicians. In all other respects, however, things would remain 
much as they are today. We already have our own national institutions: our 
national galleries, orchestras, opera, theatre, and dance companies. What used 
to be the Scottish Arts Council, now known as Creative Scotland, is already 
independent of London and the UK state. There is very little that an 
independent Scottish government could do for the arts that the devolved 
Scottish government can't already do now. Nothing, for instance, prevents the 
devolved government from transferring more of its budget to the support, 
fostering and promotion of the arts, nothing, that is, except the absence of 
the will to do so.

Kathleen Jamie
 Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
I emailed a dozen yes-supporting friends and asked for a snap response to the 
question "Where are we at?" Their replies make up this "poem".

Aye!

We are rolling our tongues around a 3 letter word.
We are finding our voice.
We're resisting the big-bank, multinational-dictated slippage to the Right …
Only bruising, no blood.
It's about money.
It's not about money.
It isn't all about money.
It's about fear, faith, strength.
It can't come fast enough.
We're exploring a different way of organising a country.
This won't go back in the box.
We're questioning everything.
Peacefully,
we're resisting all sorts of intimidation from the British establishment
England has been a good neighbour, but …
It's the choice between a maimed culture and a whole country.
Unionism has no new songs.
What a great time to be alive in Scotland!
We're one-thirds way round a big blind bend.

Alan Warner <http://www.guprod.gnl/books/alan-warner>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
I fully support the yes campaign: a vote for increased democracy, a vote for 
the greater representation of a unique populace and a huge chance to break with 
the moribund, corrupt, militaristic lump that is Westminster today. The 
democratic dividends for Scotland have been kept well off the agenda by the 
big-business-led no campaign and its Nicodemite fellow travellers – a few of 
whom are writers. The no calculation is clear: what kind of future society we 
want in Scotland is NOT up for discussion; society has vanished and only 
cynical short-term "economics" and globalised agendas remain. The no "ideology" 
is numbingly small-minded, ahistorical and most of all, it is cowardly.

After the 1979 fiasco of the home rule referendum, many Scots like myself (I 
am half-English), felt cheated and disenfranchised. The vote was yes (by about 
70,000); the infamous 40% rule was democratically questionable, as it converted 
abstainers and electoral roll anomalies into no votes. Then came Thatcher, 
Blair and the Cameronian; decades of rightwing monetarist rule from London.

What then are the implications for Scottish literature today? I am not 
self-important enough to believe it is part of many voters' deliberations, but 
a yes vote would free us as Scottish writers from a hidden war that rages 
inside our minds; it would grant us the light wings of a new responsibility. A 
No vote will have sinister and depressing implications. Our literature has been 
and is still bound up with concepts of independence, cultural assertiveness, 
language and that quaint old term: freedom.

Think on this: if there was a no vote, has there ever been another European 
country where a "progressive" – and to use two pompous words – 
"intelligentsia", has united in a liberation movement, yet the majority has 
finally voted against the aspirations of this movement? A no vote will create a 
profound and strange schism between the voters of Scotland and its literature; 
a new convulsion. It will be the death knell for the whole Scottish literature 
"project" – a crushing denial of an identity that writers have been 
meticulously accumulating, trying to maintain and refine. With a no vote, a 
savage division will suddenly exist between the values of most of our writing – 
past and present – and the majority of our people.

Strong cultures endure, and if the vote is very close, some might find room 
for optimism. I won't. Scotland will have become a mere global brand, its 
reality officially cancelled by its own people, and only approved by 
Westminster when sufficiently convenient, as a nuclear military base etc. 
Ultimately, Scotland will have voted Tory.

There is an 18th-century Scottish poem, by this guy, I can't seem to quite 
recall; it's all fading away. Something about "bought and sold … for … gold"? 
On our conscience it will rest.

John Burnside <http://www.guprod.gnl/books/john-burnside>
 Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
Naturally, I favour independence, not just for Scots, but for all citizens, 
which is why I reject the SNP's phoney independence referendum in September. 
For me, real independence would mean liberation, finally, from a feudal system 
in which more than half of Scotland is owned by fewer than 500 people and 
where, last year, the government paid out £663,695,661 in agricultural, 
forestry and food-processing subsidies, much of it to rich individuals and 
corporations. The injustice of this system is clear, yet, according to former 
Scottish Land Reform Review Group member Jim Hunter: "We're now six years into 
an SNP government that has so far done absolutely nothing legislatively about 
the fact that Scotland continues to be stuck with … the most undemocratic land 
ownership system in the entire developed world."

I also want independence from high-level meddling in local affairs the 
government's aggressive support for the Viking wind turbine project (which was 
rejected at judicial review, only for that judgment to be overturned last week 
– in a single day). Scotland, it seems, is open for business, no matter what 
the environmental costs.

I could go on but this government's record speaks for itself. Yes, Scotland 
needs to become independent – but independent of the charlatans, liars and 
chancers who have run it for too long. The way forward, in Scotland, as 
elsewhere, is direct representation, genuine redistribution of land and wealth, 
and, first and foremost, environmental policies that foster the health and 
wellbeing of all living things.

Janice Galloway
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
It seems a long time ago now, but what I looked forward to in the runup to 
September 2014 was information. I'd be briefed, right? I'd hear a positive and 
strong pro-union case and a strong and positive independence case. I thought I 
deserved that much. What has been most genuinely shocking this far down the 
line is the tenor of the no campaign. The initial flurry of panda-reclamation 
threats, Scotland being "disallowed" the BBC'sDoctor Who, the half-cock threat 
of enforced border controls (not required by independent Ireland) and Baron 
Robertson of Port Ellen's rant about "the forces of darkness rubbing their 
hands in glee" at the prospect of Scottish secession, seemed daft enough. But 
they were tasters of what the no campaign thought the electorate deserved, ie 
not much.

Scaremongering is not a vote-winner – it is an appeal to fear, an invitation 
to lack confidence, an attack on openminded voters who imagined they deserved 
better. Alistair Darling's impression of Private Frazer fromDad's Army 
consistently telling me I am doomed is not a "case" for union, it is a case 
against aspiration. Belittling yes voters as "bravehearts", "death-eaters" 
(whatever they are) andHarry Lauder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/feb/27/from-the-archives>s, whose 
deepest fear is how much anything costs in only the most literal sense is not a 
case either. It is dismissal.

The moral climate, the educational and social climate, and greedy and 
messianic big-government politics concern me. How to deal with London's already 
independent city-state status and unconnectedness to the rest of the UK 
concerns me. I want my vote to mean something. But the no campaign seems not to 
notice that people like me (or my thoroughly English, thoroughly yes-inclined 
husband) exist. I hope they find out we do. If not, all of us might end up with 
nothing but more of the same to look forward to.

AL Kennedy <http://www.guprod.gnl/books/alkennedy>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
It's both inspiring and depressing to see how interested and excited an 
electorate can become when they are given the chance to consider possible 
futures that have (quite often) not been pre-packaged and spun by party 
machines. Scotland on both sides of the yes/no divide is considering paths 
ahead that diverge from the tottering Westminster model, and is largely 
embracing ideas of national identity that aren't based on racist assumptions. 
The more measured and nuanced middle ground of the debate is considering 
positive and creative approaches to democracy and the challenging economic 
circumstances faced by people all over Britain. With an established parliament 
in place we seem to have been willing to lower our expectations of behaviour 
and levels of public service. (Although it's increasingly hard to lower our 
expectations enough to keep pace with the ever-sinking reality within the House 
of Commons and local government.) Perhaps one lesson we could learn from the 
indy debate would be to maintain the demand for hope and higher standards that 
plans for a new status quo can produce. Harnessing the potential within the 
idea that elections can actually bring about change could serve everyone in the 
British Isles.
 