
The leadership of Scotland Yard is all white for the first time in a decade 
after the last senior minority ethnic officer in its top ranks retired, the 
Guardian has learned.

Commander Shabir Hussain's retirement means the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> is without a senior 
minority ethnic officer in a city in which more than a quarter of people are 
non-white.

Britain's biggest police force has repeatedly promised to improve its record 
on race since an independent inquiry more than a decade ago found it to be 
institutionally racist.

The latest development will open the force up to criticism that it has not 
done enough to ensure racial equality in the ranks.

Hussain sued the Met in 2008 claiming he failed to get promotion because he 
was not part of a "golden circle" of white officers. He lost the case.

The Met is awaiting the findings of an inquiry into how it handles race and 
faith issues. Bob Purkiss, who quit as one of the panellists on the inquiry 
claiming it had lost credibility, said an all-white led Met was a serious 
failure.

"They had a diversity directorate, they had development processes for ethnic 
minority officers and it shows they were not serious about pushing people 
forward," he said.

"It's not because of the ability of [minority ethnic] people or the lack of 
time in the service. They've just not been given the same opportunity to 
develop their ability and given the same opportunity as white officers."

Purkiss said the Met's claim that it would take time to change was a "blame 
the victim mentality".Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> chiefs had 
a duty to promote and develop people, he added.

In 2008 the Met had three senior minority ethnic officers. Assistant 
commissioner Tarique Ghaffur, who was the most senior, became aggrieved at what 
he felt were repeated snubs, and spectacularly fell out with the then 
commissioner Sir Ian Blair, and publicly called him a racist. Ghaffur left the 
force with a payout.

Ali Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, who reached the rank 
of commander, was suspended in September 2008 over corruption allegations and 
was last week formally kicked out of the force in disgrace after being 
convicted of trying to frame a man in a dispute over money.

Bevan Powell, acting chair of the Met section of the Black Police Association, 
said it was "not a sustainable position" to have no top ranking minority ethnic 
officers.

"We are determined to work with the commissioner and management board to 
address these issues," he said. "It is essential to retain the trust and 
confidence of Londoners. It is essential they see an organisation that reflects 
the diversity of the capital."

The gateway to the upper ranks of the police service is called the Strategic 
Command Course. There are minority ethnic officers on it but there is no 
guarantee that there will be senior jobs for them if they complete the course.

Cindy Butts, of the force's watchdog, the Metropolitan Police Authority, said 
more needed to be done. Butts, who is chairing the race and faith inquiry, is 
examining issues including how the promotion process in the Met can be made 
fairer. She said news of the force's leadership being all-white "does not bode 
well".

She added: "I would hope to see the organisation make major strides and 
efforts to ensure the top team looks more diverse."

Butts said that since the race and faith inquiry began in the winter of 2008, 
the Met had increased the number of promotions of minority ethnic officers it 
has made at middle ranks, such as inspector.

"When the organisation wants to get it right, it can," she said.

Scotland Yard said in a statement: "The Met aims to best reflect the make up 
of Londoners, whilst making sure we appoint the very best people for the jobs. 
This includes striking the right balance with gender too.

"We have some talented black and minority ethnic officers at the rank of 
superintendent and chief superintendent, this includes 10% of all borough 
commanders. Talented officers will be supported and developed through the 
promotion process to ensure we have the best team managing the Met."
 