
Michael Gove is at it again. His latest headline-grabbing announcement is that 
the AS-level, introduced in 2000 as a way of broadening the curriculum from 16 
to 19, is to be relegated back to its position as a secondary qualification. It 
will no longer count towards the 'gold standard' A-level, which is to return to 
its original status as a two-year linear course instead.

Hard as it is to believe, I actually think the education secretary got this 
one right. As a head of music, with some 10 years experience, every single 
sixth-form lesson I have ever taught has, in some way, been linked to final 
assessments. Every year, I have watched these young people, excited by the idea 
of only studying the subjects they enjoy, become despondent by Christmas. This 
is because they realise that year 12 is just another year when they have to 
reach a certain standard by a certain date.

While I doubt Gove has these same 'standards' at the heart of his plans, he 
will still be going a long way towards improving the quality of life and 
learning experienced by the nation's 16 and 17 year olds. The present system 
means that children sit three years of external examinations in a row. In some 
subjects they may sit the same exam twice or even three times during their two 
years of study. This is, and always has been, a muffler to real learning.

The jump in difficulty from GCSE music to AS level is immense. AS students are 
expected to reach the end of their course with a depth of knowledge that is 
incredibly difficult to gain in less than a year. Most of the students I teach 
have not had the benefit of years of outside musical and theoretical 
instruction, and are thrust into GCSE after having one lesson of music per week 
at key stage 3. Even those who have been learning an instrument for a while 
find this a difficult step.When universities talk about the AS level widening 
access <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-21156370> they are clearly not 
talking about music. Young musicians need time to develop more than anything 
else. The eight months from September to May are simply not enough to develop 
the skills of performance, composition and analysis to anywhere near A-grade 
standard.

The original thinking behind the AS was simple. Concerned that A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> were too narrow, the previous 
government sought to bring Britain in line with Europe and the baccalaureate 
model of education. Of course, the reality is somewhat different. Universities 
still make their offers in the traditional way – for three full A-level grades. 
Students in state schools still usually only take a maximum of four AS 
subjects, and those who take five generally drop one at the end of year 12 to 
avoid going bald from stress. Of course, year 12 used to have a broad 
curriculum all by itself, without the need for government initiatives. Taking 
part in plays, concerts and sport, along with playing pool and table football 
in the common room, used to be regarded as worthy activities. Not so, post 
2000. As a result of this, the AS resit became the norm. It was ok if you 
stuffed up year 12, because you could always retake your units in year 13 
anyway.

Of course, this meant that in year 13 when students were grappling with even 
more difficult concepts and getting incredibly worried about where they would 
be spending the next three years, they were also having to re-do all the work 
they hadn't done properly last year. I'd much rather not allow students to 
re-sit AS modules, but the pressure on teachers to raise grades puts us in an 
impossible position. If A-levels are supposed to be preparing young people for 
university, we have to ask ourselves this question – how many universities 
allow the resitting of individual exams?

Since Gove announced the changes to A-levels on 23 January 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2013/jan/23/michael-gove-a-level-reforms#start-of-comments>
, I have heard various arguments against the change. Some colleagues, notably 
those not working in arts subjects, have argued that the AS-level encourages 
'focus' in learning. One in particular thought that regular external exams 
meant that students would be ready for the 'rigour' of a tough university. To 
which I ask: why would you need to be ready for university a year early?

Getting rid of the AS will be the best thing for music teachers since the 
subject was made compulsory. My year 12 students might now be able to describe 
what happens in music history in the gap between Vivaldi and Mozart. They will 
hear Debussy, Ravel and Stravinsky. They will discuss whether John Cage's 4'33 
is actually music, or just performance art. They will read about Schoenberg's 
20th century Vienna, and take a stroll with Mahler. They will play solos in 
concerts, and learn to love practising their instruments. In other words, they 
will not be restricted by exams. They will learn.

Victoria Pearson is a music teacher at a London secondary school. She has been 
a classroom teacher for 10 years now, having previously worked as a visiting 
music tutor.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get articles direct to 
your inbox, and to access thousands of free resources, sign up to theGuardian 
Teacher Network here <https://id.guardian.co.uk/register/?INTCMP=ILCJOBTXT9366>
. Looking for your next role? See ourGuardian jobs for schools 
<http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/jobs/education/schools> site for thousands of the 
latest teaching, leadership and support jobs
 