
In an otherwise lacklustre campaign, the most noteworthy element of the 
European elections inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> thus far has been a disturbing 
incident in Lurgan, Co Armagh.

While out canvassing for the SDLP <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sdlp> 
candidate, Alban Magennis, on Tuesday night, the party's local assembly member, 
Dolores Kelly, was threatened with a gun.

A man wearing a balaclava pointed the weapon at Kelly and told her she had 
five minutes to leave the republican Kilwilkee estate or she would be shot.

Within the area, there is a small but dedicated network of support for 
dissident republicans. The man charged with murdering two British soldiers in 
Antrim last March, Colin Duffy, was based there.

This menacing and overt threat to democratic politicians is a worrying 
development, especially for those on the nationalist side of the divide, 
although, at the time of writing, the SDLP were back again in the same area, 
clearly defying the death threats.

On the unionist side, the contest is arguably more interesting than the 
intra-nationalist battle in which Sinn Fein is likely to come out on top again.

The key question is how the sitting MEP, Jim Allister, will perform.

The former QC is perhaps the most articulate and able of all the candidates. 
He is also the most hardline.

Allister resigned from the Democratic Unionist party over its decision to 
enter into a powersharing government with Sinn Fein in 2007, despite the fact 
that it was Ian Paisley who persuaded him to go back into politics and stand 
for the DUP in the last European elections.

The enmity between the DUP and Allister is deep and bitter. Diane Dodds, the 
DUP European candidate and the wife of the Stormont minister, Nigel Dodds, 
accuses Allister of splitting the vote and opening up the prospect of Sinn Fein 
topping the poll.

Allister has countered that the DUP betrayed its promises to the unionist 
electorate by putting Sinn Fein into power in the first place.

During a visit to the Balmoral Show in Belfast last week, Allister seemed 
relaxed and confident that he will spring a surprise.

Pressing the flesh of the Ulster agricultural community inside the Kings Hall 
complex, he told the Guardian he could hold the seat he won under the DUP flag.

"This is the real test for the DUP where the unionist electorate will judge 
them for breaking their word," Allister said as he handed out leaflets and 
shook hands with farmers and their families, many from rural unionist redoubts 
that formed the bedrock of the DUP's evangelical Protestant support base.

"The DUP spent years lambasting David Trimble for letting Sinn Fein into 
power, and the minute the DUP got to be the top unionist party they did the 
same. They will not be forgiven for their duplicity."

Allister was also concentrating his fire on the expenses of MPs such as the 
husband and wife DUP duo Peter and Iris Robinson.

Northern Ireland's first couple were revealed to have spent thousands of 
pounds of parliamentary expenses on food bills in London. They also came under 
scrutiny for their lifestyle and were branded the "swish family Robinson".

The rebel unionist MEP has seized on the public anger over the abuse of 
expenses at Westminster.

"On the doorstep, the other issue to the fore is the MPs' expenses, and that 
anger from the public extends to some of our MPs here in Northern Ireland," he 
said.

Allister was joined at the show by Willie Ross, the former Ulster Unionist 
hardline MP who was a scourge of David Trimble and his liberal unionism from 
the Good Friday Agreement onwards.

Realistically, Allister may not retain his seat, but he is expected to achieve 
a respectable vote.

The end result will, in all likelihood, be that Sinn Fein, the DUP and the 
Ulster Unionists/Conservatives go back to Brussels and Strasbourg.

Private polling suggests Allister, the Traditional Unionist Voice founder, 
will win up to 40,000 votes, not enough to go back to Europe but enough all the 
same to stop the DUP from topping the poll this time.

Moreover, 40,000 votes equates to at least five seats in the next Northern 
Ireland assembly elections.

Five or possibly six TUV seats at Stormont could upset the delicate balance of 
powersharing in the regional parliament.

Allister, and those like Ross who may follow him back to the assembly, could 
hold the balance of power – which in turn may prevent a resumption of 
powersharing in a hung assembly.

In the shorter term, a respectable vote for Allister next week could spook the 
Democratic Unionists base pushing the party back into the political laager.

As Allister went meeting and greeting the Ulster countryside in the city for 
the day, Ross told the Guardian the TUV leader was now "unionism's insurance 
policy".

He said: "If Jim gets re-elected, or even if he gets a high vote, the brakes 
will come on moves by the DUP to further placate Sinn Fein.

"It will slow down the drive towards devolving policing and justice powers. 
The DUP will be too terrified to dare."
 