
If there’s one thing that I’ve learned in the few short years that I’ve been a 
fully-fledged scientist, it’s that time is one of the most valuable commodities 
that you can give a researcher. In all its myriad forms, time is invaluable to 
the scientific process – time to develop ideas, time to write grants. The time 
that you need to run an experiment. Critically, the time that participants are 
willing to give you in the pursuit of knowledge. It’s a precious thing, for 
everyone involved.

Like with many things we take for granted, it’s easy to forget the importance 
of time until it’s gone. This is a point that becomes acutely salient in the 
case ofAlzheimer’s disease 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=100>. 
Once a definitive diagnosis has been made, the average life expectancy for 
patients with the disease is around six years. It robs people of their future, 
but more than that, Alzheimer’s disease robs them of their past – short term 
memory loss is a common indicator, and as the disease progresses, it can eat 
into memories from earlier in life.

But it’s not just time that’s an issue when it comes to Alzheimer’s disease. 
Space is a problem too – or rather, spatial navigation. Being able to 
successfully steer your way around different sorts of surroundings is obviously 
a pretty important skill to have. Broadly, there are two frames of reference 
that you can use to do it. ‘Egocentric’ frames of reference rely on remembering 
the locations of landmarks in relation to your own body – so, for instance, if 
you take a fixed route to work, you might learn to turn left at the shop, then 
turn right when you see the petrol station. In contrast, ‘allocentric’ 
navigation relies on creating and remembering a mental map of an environment, 
and remembering the location of landmarks in relation to other landmarks. 
Deficits in both of these navigation systemsappear in the early stages of 
Alzheimer’s disease 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262805836_The_role_of_egocentric_and_allocentric_abilities_in_Alzheimer%27s_disease_A_systematic_review>
, but the precise way in which they decline isn’t yet fully understood. Part of 
the problem is that we don’t really have a good grasp of how healthy people use 
these systems, or what they do when they get lost. That has important 
implications in the clinic, because if a patient presents with spatial 
navigation problems, it’s can be difficult to tell whether that’s because they 
are showing signs of dementia, or whether it’s just because they’re generally 
poor at navigation.

Alzheimer's treatment closer as brain inflammation shown to be key
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/08/alzheimers-treatment-closer-as-brain-inflammation-shown-to-be-key>
This is where a team led by Professor Michael Hornberger at UEA and Dr Hugo 
Spiers at UCL come in. At the start of May, they launched a new mobile game 
calledSea Hero Quest <http://www.seaheroquest.com/en/>. The game puts you in 
the shoes of an unnamed sailor, whose father is slowly losing memories of his 
life as a seafaring explorer. To try and help him remember his past, your job 
is to travel around cartoon waterways in search of pieces of his old journal. 
At the start of a level, you’re given a top-down map of the waterways that 
shows a number of buoy markers you need to navigate through. Once you’ve 
memorised it, you simply need to sail your ship around the 3D world and hit 
each buoy in numerical order. The information about the route you take, and 
what you do if you get lost, is saved and transmitted for further analysis.

“The idea was to create a global benchmark for navigation behaviour in healthy 
people on a population level,” says Professor Hornberger. “The perfect way to 
do this was via online gaming, as many online games use virtual reality and can 
be played anywhere.” By getting this sort of data in a huge sample of people, 
the idea is that Hornberger and Spiers can gain a more nuanced insight into 
whether there are any differences in how people of different ages, sex and even 
geographical location navigate. “For example, what is the normal navigation for 
a 55 year old man from England?” Hornberger explains. “The game is meant to be 
challenging, as we want to see how healthy people navigate and get lost. This 
will then inform new approaches towards dementia diagnosis and management.”

Detecting dementia: the first steps towards dignity | Tania Browne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2014/jul/21/detecting-dementia-dignity-alzheimers>
While the game can’t be used to diagnose dementia, the data collected from it 
has the potential to inform a wealth of research into Alzheimer’s disease in 
the future. “We are sampling the position and heading direction from each 
player in the game every 500ms, which will allow us to use artificial 
intelligence approaches on the data to potentially predict where people get 
lost,” explains Hornberger. Ultimately then, by understanding how healthy 
people lose their way, and whether there are any systematic patterns in the 
decline of spatial navigation abilities over time, it might be possible to 
better adapt the environments that people with Alzheimer’s disease live in – 
from care homes to entire towns.

Sea Hero Quest took 12 months to set up and launch, and initially, will be 
available to download until the end of the year. Hornberger explains that the 
goal by then was to have 100,000 people play the game for at least two minutes. 
As of this week, it’s been downloaded over 960,000 times. The plan is to update 
the app in June, with more levels that investigate other aspects of spatial 
navigation.

“From the beginning it was clear to us that we didn’t want to create another 
online cognitive experiment - instead we wanted to have a fun, casual mobile 
game which would collect valid scientific data,” Hornberger says. “This was 
also important so that we wouldn’t only get citizen scientists playing the 
game, but the general public.” The key to this experiment being a success, 
then, is to get the best possible representation of the population at large. 
For that, all the research team needs is two minutes of time from as many 
people as possible. Two minutes. Nothing really, in the grand scheme of things. 
But in the quest to understand dementia, it could mean a potential lifetime.
 