
A lack of transparency on antibiotic use by the Australian farming industry is 
undermining efforts to prevent superbugs developing and spreading through the 
food supply, an infectious diseases physician and microbiologist has said.

The comments from Prof Peter Collignon come as the UN general assembly holds a 
meeting involving all 193 member states to develop a plan tofight the threat of 
antibiotic resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
. It is only the fourth time the assembly has met on a public health issue.

Collignon said that while antibiotic resistance in humans through 
overprescribing of the drugs was part of the problem, the use of antibiotics in 
the food industry was being “widely abused around the world”.

UN agrees to fight 'the biggest threat to modern medicine': antibiotic 
resistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
“There is a lack of appropriate controls in Australia for antibiotic use in 
food,” said Collignon, who has sat on a number of WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> Organisation advisory 
committees on antibiotic resistance.

“We know the US pork industry uses four to five times the amount of 
antibiotics as the industry in Denmark. In Australia we don’t really know, we 
don’t know which antibiotic is given for which animal and how much.

“In humans you need prescriptions so we can get that data but in food and 
animals we don’t know because there’s not the mechanism to get the data, and 
manufacturers cite commercial confidence.”

In other countries, third-generation antibiotic-resistant E.coli in the 
chicken supply has been found. In Australia, those same antibiotics are being 
used in pigs and cattle, Collignon said, though it was unclear how much.

“As far as we are aware it’s not used in chickens in Australia but there isn’t 
a law that says it can’t be,” he said. “If a vet were to start using it 
tomorrow in chickens, there would be no way for me to find that out.


“Perdue chickens in US produce twice as many chickens as the whole of 
Australia and yet they’ve managed to go completely antibiotic-free.

“They had to invest about $100m to do so but, by making the investment and 
improving animal husbandry, it was possible. So any argument from industry that 
they need antibiotics and it can’t be stopped is facetious.”

With Australians travelling overseas and produce being imported from overseas, 
the UN general assembly meeting on the issue would be an important step towards 
encouraging other countries to clean up their water supply and curb their use 
of antibiotics, particularly in livestock feed as an illness preventative and 
as a growth stimulant, he said.

Prof Lindsay Grayson, the director of the department of infectious diseases 
and microbiology at Austin Health, said hospitals and laboratories could also 
become more transparent about the incidence of superbugs. The Australian 
Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care has been working on 
establishing a national antimicrobial resistance surveillance system as part of 
its Antimicrobial Use and Resistance in Australia [Aura] project.

But Grayson said while this was a “reasonable start” the detection of 
superbugs should be notifiable – that is, required under law to be reported to 
health departments. Currently only Tasmania and Western Australia have made 
certain resistant strains of diseases notifiable.

“In terms of how many patients were affected by superbugs last year in 
Australia, we don’t know,” Grayson said. “Many hospitals have records but there 
is no organised way this is collated. Many experts believe these bugs are so 
serious they should be made notifiable.”

Australian government to crack down on antibiotic overuse in humans and animals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/02/australian-government-to-crack-down-on-antibiotic-overuse-in-humans-and-animals>
In June Australia’s most comprehensive report on antibiotic resistance was 
released by Aura, finding that, in 2014, 10.7m Australians were prescribed 
antimicrobials – 46% of the population. Australia is among the highest 
prescribers of antibiotics in the world.

The report also found that Australian hospitals had the highest rates of 
resistant enterococcus, a bacteria that can cause a range of infections in 
patients undergoing invasive surgery, in the world. In 2014 Australia had the 
highest rates of vancomycin resistance in enterococcus faecium in the world.

“On any given day in an Australian hospital in 2014, 38.4% of patients were 
being administered an antimicrobial,” the report found. “Of these, 24.3% were 
noncompliant with guidelines and 23% were considered inappropriate.”


 Prof Lyn Gilbert, a researcher with the Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious 
Diseases and Biosecurity, said while she and other experts had been warning 
about antibiotic resistance for the past 40 years, governments only began 
taking it seriously in the past five to 10 years.

“How effective the UN general assembly will be remains to be seen,” she said. 
“There’s no doubt the issue is now taken seriously but what action is likely to 
come out of this meeting is another issue.

“There are a lot of vested interests in this. But it does put pressure on 
countries where control of antibiotics either in agriculture or unregulated 
access to the drugs for humans is an issue.”

But Dr Pat Mitchell, a former pig farmer and the research and innovation 
manager for Australian Pork Limited, said the farming industry was aware of 
concern about the issue of antibiotic resistance.

She said Australian Pork Limited had recently combined with the Australian 
Chicken Meat Federation and the Australian Lot Feeders’ Association to develop 
an antimicrobial stewardship plan that she hoped would soon be signed off on by 
board members.

“We are people that care about and love our animals, and we’re all trying to 
make sure we’re all trying to make sure we use antibiotics as little as 
possible,” Mitchell said.

“There is no use for growth promotion or using when unnecessary. There seems 
to be this idea that we back up a truck and fill it with antibiotics and feed 
it to the animals. It’s just not true.

“We have come together off our own back to look into the issue and develop a 
plan.”

She said antibiotic strains of disease were often brought on to farms by 
humans, birds and feral animals. The industry was making an effort to record 
antibiotic use and minimise it, she added.

Guardian Australia has contacted the National Farmers’ Federation and 
Australian Pork for comment.
 