
Years ago, the comedian Alexei Sayle used to entertain his audience with 
wondrous tales about holidays in Albania. Then it seemed an almost exotically 
remote place, isolated from the world by the communist government of Enver 
Hoxha, living in a parallel universe far removed from the west, a land where 
religion, make-up and long hair were banned.

Then came the end of the cold war. The tight borders were thrown open in 1992 
and suddenly it became possible for anyone to visit. But the end of communism 
brought with it widescale corruption and crime, and the country soon acquired a 
reputation for lawlessness and unreliability. Now, however, Club Med is hoping 
to start operating at Kakome Bay on the southern riviera - a move meeting 
fierce resistance at the moment from locals who claim the land proposed for the 
development is theirs - and other travel companies are eyeing the same area 
with interest.

Tourism is now seen as the possible saviour for a country that was almost 
ruined by the scandal of the 1997 pyramid-selling scheme. Although currently 
tourism accounts for less than 10% of the national income, the potential in a 
country that can offer warm Ionian seas, clean beaches, mighty mountains, 
terrific fresh fish and seafood, cheap hotels and a friendly population is 
obviously great.

Sarandë, the gateway to the coastline, is full of construction sites as 
hopeful local speculators throw up hotels in anticipation of a boom. So the 
advice for anyone who has harboured any curiosity about Albania has to be - go 
now before it becomes like everywhere else.

The Albanian riviera is best reached via Corfu. From there, two ferries a day 
travel across to Sarandë for around €15 each way. Best to check the night 
before you depart as to when the ferry will be leaving because times vary. No 
visas are required for holders of European Union passports.

Many day trippers, particularly the British, make the trip over to visit 
Butrint, a short journey to the south of Sarandë, to see the spectacular 
collection of Roman, Greek, Byzantine and Venetian ruins, which have benefited 
recently from the care of the British-based Butrint Foundation. It is now a 
world heritage site. But it would be a waste to visit Albania without staying 
for longer than one day. The ferry-ride itself is spectacular enough, taking 
you in towards the snow-capped mountains that tower above Sarandë.

You can see why the country so entranced Edward Lear when he visited here in 
1848. "The men wear their hair long and walk with the complete strut of 
Albanian dignity," he wrote in Journals Of A Landscape Painter In Greece and 
Albania, which is recommended reading if you plan a trip.

Hotels vary from the very basic to the fairly luxurious. We stayed on the 
seafront in Sarandë at the amiable Porto Eda Hotel - Sarandë was called Porto 
Eda in the days of Italian occupation in honour of Mussolini's daughter. Prices 
are reasonable, although the breakfast was basic: bread, feta cheese and a tiny 
container of honey. This reminded me of the tale of the Scottish 
accordion-playing genius, Jimmy Shand, who, confronted in the 1950s by an early 
example of those individual honey pots that hotels were just starting to use, 
looked at it for a moment and said brightly to the waitress: "I see you keep a 
bee!")

In Sarandë, people stroll sociably along the promenade in the evening, and 
there is a world of Eurodiscos, too, which attracts mainly Albanian tourists in 
the summer. You can also try the local firewater, raki, which everyone seems to 
make in their kitchens and which will be offered to you as a morning pick-me-up 
or an evening aperitif.

For dinner, visit one of the many seafront restaurants in Sarandë that offer 
fresh fish and Albanian wine, which is fine. Alternatively just outside the 
town is Likusri, a converted ruin that is now a restaurant with one of the 
finest of views.

Way to go

 Getting there:  First Choice (0870 8503999, firstchoice.co.uk 
<http://www.firstchoice.co.uk>) flies to Corfu for seven or 14 nights from 13 
UK airports from £119 rtn inc tax. From there two ferries a day go to Sarandë, 
for around €15 each way.

 Where to stay:  In Sarandë the Porto Eda Hotel (+852 3363, portoeda.com 
<http://www.portoeda.com>) has doubles from €30 B&B. 

 Further information:  Information on the Butrint ruins: 
butrintfound.dial.pipex.com <http://www.butrintfound.dial.pipex.com>. Country 
code: 00 355. Time difference: +1hr. Flight time London-Corfu: 3hrs. £1 = 181 
lekes.
 