
Europe ends here. Go west and the next stop is the New Jersey shoreline, less 
than five hours away by air when the jet-stream is blowing at full tilt. Once 
used as stepping stones for early sailors on the way to the New World, the 
Azores have a long history of sending explorers and immigrants to the Americas. 
Almost everyone in the islands has relatives in Boston and New Bedford, 
families who left these rural outposts of Portugal for a better life abroad. 
Today, the children of many immigrants have returned, seeking what they say is 
a higher quality of life in these tranquil islands.

A thousand miles west of Lisbon, surrounded by the deep waters of the 
mid-Atlantic ridge, the Azores celebrate their strong connection with the sea. 
Oceanic breezes produce the cleanest air in Europe, and warmed by the gulf 
stream, the waters of the Azores attract dozens of species of whales and 
dolphins in relatively large concentrations - animals that were hunted until 30 
years ago, but now draw a steady flow of tourists wanting to get close to 
marine mammals.

Sperm whales are present all year round, though it is usually solitary males 
that are seen in winter, while the mothers with calves arrive in high summer. 
Then they are joined by minke whales, pilot whales and, occasionally, the 
biggest of them all - blue whales.

In search of cetaceans, I took a fast boat seven miles offshore. Bruno, our 
skipper, was in radio contact with lookouts perched at vantage points along the 
coast who would spot a "blow" from a whale's spout at twice that range. Bruno 
had seen a whale that morning, but we were not to be so lucky. "The problem is 
they can dive for almost an hour, so we never know where they're going to be," 
he explained. "We will look for dolphins instead."

For two hours we skirted the coast, the blue swell of the Atlantic and the 
long rays of the setting sun making it hard to imagine we would see anything at 
all. But then they came. Ten, 12, perhaps 15 leaping shapes carving a shining 
path through the waves. These were common dolphins, a relatively small species 
with a distinctive swathe of white underside that sweeps elegantly towards 
their neat, flat flukes. The dolphins were feeding, purposefully following 
something that we could not see, criss-crossing a patch of ocean accompanied by 
a flock of gulls and terns that seemed to sense the same prey.

For several minutes they disappeared from sight, lost in the curling blue 
waves. Bruno cut the engine, waiting for the dolphins to reappear. This time 
they had a surprise for us - a newborn calf less than half the size of its 
mother. The miniature creature leapt free of the water for an instant, showing 
us its perfect hydrodynamic form and drawing a gasp of pleasure from everyone 
onboard.

The effervescence of these aquatic mammals was echoed back on dry land - 
although in some areas of the island of São Miguel, the expression "dry land" 
is something of a misnomer. At Furnas, the sibilant hiss of escaping steam and 
the hubble-bubble of boiling water gave the impression of a pressure cooker 
about to blow its top. The air had an acrid tang as sulphurous gases wafted 
from small craters full of scaldingly hot water. In places the water fizzled 
out of small depressions in the rock, while just yards away there was an 
evil-looking pothole descending deep underground, its edges covered in 
glistening grey gloop where the volcanic gases had left their mineral-rich 
accretions.

Azoreans will tell you proudly that the word for a volcanic crater, caldera, 
comes from the Portuguese caldeira, and that it was first coined in this 
archipelago. But apart from the small patch of steaming fumaroles at Furnas, 
the violent seismic origins of São Miguel are now swathed in a lush green cloak.

Furnas, towards the eastern end of São Miguel, is probably the most visited 
tourist attraction on the island. In the 1930s, an elegant spa hotel, Terra 
Nostra, was built to make use of the thermal springs, and in its great circular 
pool surrounded by ferns and towering palms there were Scandinavian tourists 
bobbing around in the chocolate brown water. Elderly ladies in orange dressing 
gowns and bathing caps lowered themselves gingerly into the opaque depths, 
their faces breaking into broad smiles at the soothing temperatures. Inside, 
the lobby retains its original art deco fittings: sweeping mahogany banisters 
fit for an ocean liner, gleaming chrome lampshades and even a circular fish 
tank set into the wall.

Nearby, at the edge of the Furnas lake the local hoteliers were putting the 
earth's natural broilers to good use. Cooking pots filled with potatoes, yams, 
chicken, black sausage and cabbage had been buried in the steaming ground and 
left for six or seven hours to produce the local speciality: cozido à Portugesa 
nas Furnas. Natural energy may be cheap, but the culinary result is dubious, 
though advocates claim the steam releases all of the vegetables' natural 
flavours.

The climate and fertile soil of the Azores certainly create excellent 
conditions for vegetables to grow. The archipelago's earth bursts with life, 
creating a haven for temperate plants and flowers, and a bewildering variety of 
crops. Most of the island is used for dairy production - almost a third of 
Portugal's milk and cheese is produced here. Almost half of the quarter-million 
inhabitants still work the land, and even on São Miguel, seat of the regional 
capital, Ponta Delgada, there are still farmers delivering milk in horse-drawn 
traps.

 São Miguel is charmingly old-fashioned and rather suited to gentility. The 
bucket and spade brigade are unlikely to abandon the golden beaches of the 
Algarve for the Azores, whose black sands are less obviously alluring, and 
there are no clubs to tempt the Ibiza set. The Azores remain resolutely 
Portuguese, though each of the nine islands has a different character - Santa 
Maria feels almost Mediterranean, while Flores and Corvo are the most rugged 
and remote. Pico, sometimes called the "black island", is dominated by the bulk 
of its active volcano rising over 6,000ft above sea level. Terceira boasts a 
World Heritage Site in the picturesque town of Angra, dating from the 15th 
century, while Graciosa is famous for its wines and working windmills.

At the tiny village of Praia, almost half-way along the south coast of São 
Miguel, Manuel Oliveira was my guide to Lagoa do Fogo (Fire Lake). Unlike 
Furnas, Fogo is filled with cold water and sits at the heart of a natural 
reserve. Walking here is generally safe, and the landscape, while spectacular, 
feels unthreatening, one of the attractions the tourist board is keen to 
promote. "This is one of the most strenuous walks on São Miguel," Manuel 
explained as we toiled up a steep gradient. "It takes around five hours if you 
take it slowly, but it's only the first 600 yards that are tough."

Following a farm track, we climbed away from the coast road past neat terraced 
fields surrounded by dry-stone walls made of local basalt. We passed farmers 
bent double as they tended their vines. The gnarled branches stretched low 
across the dark earth like witches' fingers.

Early in the season, the hedgerows were already filled with rampant butterfly 
ginger, bustling hydrangeas and belladonna lilies. By summer the hydrangeas 
will have bloomed into incandescent blue and there will be vivid scarlet 
camellias competing for attention in the hedgerows.

After an hour and a half, we emerged into an enclosed valley surrounded by 
sheer walls. Up and up we walked, emerging from the valley on to the rim of the 
caldera and looking down onto the Lagoa do Fogo. There are no roads here, and 
the lake shone blue and calm in the fresh high air. To one side we had the 
lake, cool and mysterious, and to our right a view of the dark mirror of the 
Atlantic stretching, seemingly, to the edge of the world.

To regain the coast we walked down through the valley of the Ribeira da Praia, 
a timeless rural landscape where a solitary whitewashed cottage stood out from 
a brilliant emerald hillside.

You don't have to be a walker to enjoy São Miguel - its rural roads and rocky 
coastline make for pleasant driving, but it would seem a shame to miss out on a 
glimpse of the island's pure unspoilt heart. "Look there!" Manuel exclaimed as 
we neared the foot of the valley. On arching wingtips a buzzard wheeled in the 
sky above us - the bird mistakenly identified by early sailors as one they 
called açor in mainland Portugal, and to which the archipelago owes its name. 
It was another, suitably exhilarating, natural high on which to end my 
exploration of this formerly fiery but now bountiful place.

· Tim Ecott is the author of Vanilla: Travels in Search of the Luscious 
Substance (Micheal Joseph, £16.99)

Way to go

 Getting there: Sunvil (020-8758 4747,  sunvil.co.uk <http://www.sunvil.co.uk>
) is offering the first scheduled non-stop flight to the Azores from Gatwick 
from April 5. Prices start from £442 per week B&B at the hotel Vila Nova (+296 
301 600) in Ponta Delgada.

 Further information: Tourist information: visitazores.org 
<http://www.visitazores.org>. 

Walking Guide: Manuel Oliveira (+914 460 197). 

Whalewatching: Picos de Aventura (+296 283288, picosdeaventura.com 
<http://www.picosdeaventura.com>). 

Country code: 00 351. 

Flight time London-São Miguel 3 hrs. 

Time difference: -1hr. 

£1 = 1.41 euros.
 