
This spring has been slow. There wasn't even the slightest chance that I was 
going to dare a few lines of early veg under the cloches, as I usually do over 
the Easter break. Admittedly it fell early this year, but my local nursery 
already had bedding plants in stock. When I asked who was buying, the owner 
laughed and said: 'Just the mad people!' At the same time last year I was 
walking barefoot through the sand dunes of the Gower Peninsula in a T-shirt, 
but this year I was gardening in winter woollies and a hat.

Very sensibly the garden refused to budge, or at least it moved with extreme 
caution, the buds showing just tiny shifts from day to day. Early starters 
suffered under a thick white layer of snow on Easter Sunday. The Narcissus 
'Sundial' bowed under the weight and never recovered, and it was odd to see the 
buds on the peonies poking through the thickest snow I can remember for some 
time in Peckham, here in south London. Frost seared the new shoots on my 
Hydrangea villosa, while everywhere magnolias hung in tatters like old chammy 
leathers.

Of course, there were advantages to the cool weather: the blossom lasted for 
weeks. Usually I panic as I miss the detail in the spring flurry, but this year 
I could savour that wonderful moment when the first buds break and there is 
still all that expectation in the trees. I went back day after day to look up 
into cherry branches that held the flower for three weeks or more. The cold 
made me nervous, though; my early potatoes stayed in the garage an extra 
fortnight and the pelargoniums a whole extra month on last year. Driven by the 
cold, I made the decision to make my life easier by committing to a cold frame. 
After years of fretting in the last few weeks before it is really safe to put 
things out (but having to because I have run out of windowsills in the house), 
I finally have an ally that is already making my life easier.

It has been years since I gardened with the aid of a cold frame, but since it 
arrived from Gabriel Ash (www.gabrielash.com <http://www.gabrielash.com>), I am 
beginning to wonder why I didn't make this move earlier. I kidded myself that I 
really wanted a greenhouse and I made do with cloches, but my frame is already 
allowing me to garden better. Cuttings that had to overwinter in what I call my 
Corner of Shame (because I lose too many things there to mention) were tucked 
away from that lethal combination of cold and wet. As soon as the sap was up 
and I could see they were moving again, they were shuffled out to fend for 
themselves and their positions replaced with tender salvias and pelargoniums 
that were already straining in the half-light of the garage. The garage, with 
its corrugated polycarbonate roof, is fine as long as plants are resting and 
dormant, but as soon as the spring solstice hits and the light is ever more 
plentiful, they strain for release.

So, under a new regime, the datura cuttings and their tender friends were 
given all the light they needed mid-April and I was able to acclimatise them to 
being out in the world by chocking the frame open at breakfast time and closing 
it down again after supper. Although the spring was cold, I was ahead by the 
beginning of May because the plants had the air and the light they needed and 
their limbs were muscular rather than flabby and vulnerable to the elements. I 
also took the opportunity to start my dahlias ahead of time, and potted them up 
rather than putting them directly in the ground to steal a march on time. I am 
trying some new varieties on the allotment specifically for cutting and I need 
to get them through the point at which they are most vulnerable to slugs before 
planting them out. With several inches of growth above ground and a yoke of 
sharp grit to deter the pests, at least for a while, I can concentrate my 
energies elsewhere.

The cold-frame rotation continued and, at the beginning of May, when the 
tender perennials were beefed up and tough enough to cope up by the shelter of 
the house, the space was liberated for the half-hardy annuals that by then were 
straining on the window sills. Where I usually have to hold them under cloches 
or fleece them up for a fortnight before it is really warm enough to let them 
loose in the beds, I was able to keep them growing in the optimum conditions 
afforded by the frame. Plants should be square and stout and ready for action 
before they are liberated.

The point at which your garden is reliably frost free is different for all of 
us. I have a garden in the Cotswolds that sits at river level, and here the 
cold lingers like a gang of teenagers lurking in the background and up to no 
good. Up on the hill, just feet away, the gardens are frost free. It also 
varies wildly from year to year, and in my garden here it was the first time in 
a decade that I have had frost in April. Clients in Yorkshire regularly get 
blasted in Chelsea week, but this is usually the date I use as a marker for the 
coast to be clear.

Putting my neck on the line here, it should be safe in the next fortnight to 
liberate your bedding plants and safely set out your tomatoes and pot-reared 
courgettes. You don't have to fear you might be one of the mad ones, but a 
little help to avoid the shock of the new goes an awfully long way.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk> 

Observer offer Dahlias are frost-tender plants that require protection, but 
this collection of Dahlia 'Happy Romeo' plants is ready for the summer period. 
Buy five plants (supplied as 4cm plugs) for £17.90. Call0870 836 0909, quoting 
ref OBDP78, or send a cheque made payable to Observer Reader Offers with your 
order to Observer Dahlia Collection, OBDP78, Rookery Farm, Joys Bank, Holbeach 
St Johns, Spalding PE12 8SG. Delivery within 28 days

· For more regular updates on our allotment's progress, new films, pictures 
and slideshows, and to share your gardening comments, questions and advice, 
visitblogs.theguardian.com/allotment <mailto:blogs.theguardian.com/allotment>
 