
In 2008, every surface of an abandoned London council flat was lined with a 
thick layer of glistening, knife-sharp copper-sulphate crystals – creating an 
angular cave that was at once alluring, sensuous and needlingly dangerous. This 
was Seizure, byRoger Hiorns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/roger-hiorns> – the British artist 
(or, you might think, alchemist) who once caused flames to rise from the drains 
of the Tate, and who is currently showing a granite altarstone, which he has 
pulverised to a silky dust, at the Venice Biennale.

Seizure became a cult hit. Hiorns recalls with some amazement, even now, that 
"it became for people a spiritual space – a place that people used to stoke 
their inner lives".

The presumption was that the work, which was brought to life by the arts 
commissioning bodyArtangel <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>, 
would be temporary. But when in 2011 the condemned council block housing the 
work began to be of interest to a slowly reviving London property market, 
things changed very quickly. "It seemed such a shame to be wasteful – to 
destroy things wilfully, that's not interesting any more," said Hiorns.

So it is that Seizure opens to the public on Saturday 15 June in a new home: 
theYorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> Sculpture Park, a 
place utterly unlike the rough-and-tumble of brutalist Peckham. Instead, the 
work now sits among the gentle rolling hills, green as the heart of a lettuce, 
of an artfully designed 18th-century landscape that is now dotted with Henry 
Moores, Barbara Hepworths and Hans Josephsohns. The glassily encrusted cave now 
might draw associations with 18th-century follies or temples, or whimsical 
grottoes smothered with sea shells. Or it might – with its foliated, bristling 
surfaces, held inside a tiny, claustrophobic space – pull you into another 
world altogether.

Last week Hiorns walked into Seizure for the first time for over a year. "I 
had an uncanny moment of standing in this quite threatening environment," he 
said. "The sharpness and the oddness of it enlivens your senses, puts them in a 
different state. It's somehow like being a spaceman." Or as James Lingwood, 
co-director of Artangel put it, "It's beautiful but not nice. There's both an 
attraction and an aggression about it. It is a toxic takeover."

Seizure was an extraordinary work to make: the abandoned flat having been 
encased in watertight metal, 90,000 litres of heavily saturated copper sulphate 
solution were poured into it from an opening in the ceiling and left to react 
for just over a month. Then the liquid was pumped out and, said Lingwood, they 
all hoped they hadn't created "a glorious – or inglorious – failure". Going in 
for the first time, waving torches around that deathly blue, menacing interior, 
was like "entering Tutankhamun's tomb", he said.

It was an even more extraordinary work to remove from its host building in 
London and transport to Yorkshire: Caroline Douglas, head of the Arts Council 
collection of art, to which Hiorns has donated the work, said: "I was beside 
myself for two and a half years." With enormous delicacy, precision and 
engineering expertise, the entire flat was slid out of its parent building in 
tiny increments over the period of a week. "We didn't know how robust it would 
be," she said. "We were afraid we would end up with, in effect, a box with a 
heap of crystals at the bottom." The whole 31.2 tonnes of it was craned on to a 
truck and, after two and a half days of travelling, the wide slow load arrived 
in Yorkshire. "It was not the sort of truck you wanted to be stuck behind in a 
car," said Douglas. The removal process, funded by arts charities, cost a 
little over £40,000.

The architect Adam Khan then designed an unassuming building in precast 
concrete to house the artwork. "We didn't want to ramp up the feeling of 
preciousness, to make it seem like a jewel in a box, or indeed to make it 
spookier," said Douglas. Khan's building is like a box, its roof a lid: it can 
be lifted off and the whole artwork dangled out by cranes so that, in due 
course, it can be lent to other institutions.

Hiorns had once worked as a postman on the estate where Seizure was first 
made: he knew every inch of its geography and his original impulse was to stage 
a chemical takeover of an urban postwar concrete housing block. "We always knew 
it would be different at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park," he said, "but I think 
it's no less valid and in fact is more complicated. In some ways it was a 
perverse thing to do: but that, actually, seemed normal."
 