
Taking a plunge in the Amazon – arguably the world's most formidable river – 
is not for the faint-hearted. Piranhas, sharp-toothed sharks and deadly 
whirlpools are just a few of its perils. But they appear to have been no 
deterrent to Serbian Darko Novovic, who claims to have smashed the world record 
for swimming the South American river by 20 days.

The professional water polo player took only 46 days to swim 3,387 miles 
(5,450km) – breaking the record of the previous record holder, legendary 
Slovenian Martin Strel, according to Serbian news reports.

Novovic decided to take on the challenge after ribbing from fellow Serbs about 
Strel, who held successive world records for swimming the Danube, Mississippi, 
Yangtze, and Amazon and whose attempt to swim the latter was captured in the 
award-winning documentary Big Man River. "Our folks in the diaspora made bets 
that I would overtake Martin Strel and that's how it started," he told the 
Serbian News Agency SRNA. It took Novovic two and a half years to prepare for 
the challenge, which he finally began on the 29 September aiming to raise money 
for a church near Petrovac in Montenegro.

Novovic stressed that it had not been an easy trip from Altalaj in Peru to 
Belem in Brazil, swimming an average of 16 hours and 74 miles a day. He was 
buffeted by Amazonian winds, and had to avoid dangerous whirlpools which can 
suck swimmers into its depths. Amazon predators such as piranhas, sharks and 
anacondas were kept at bay by an improvised net cage suspended between boats 
that surrounded the 37-year-old, whose only brush with wildlife came when he 
had a close encounter with a dead crocodile. "When I saw him I started to panic 
and manically swim faster, only later on I realised the crocodile was dead and 
was eaten by piranhas," Nezavisne Novine reported him as saying. "I touched him 
and scratched my arm. I received anti-tetanus afterwards."

The biggest challenge, he said, was the water itself. "The water of the Amazon 
river is the most disgusting thing I ever experienced," SRNA reported him as 
saying. "It makes the toxic water from the river Tamish [a local Serbian river] 
seem drinkable in comparison. I had three showers every day and I had three 
protective vaccines. The Amazon is yellow some days and green the next."

A spokeswoman for Guinness World Records said it had not received an official 
notification. "We would be very interested to hear of any claims," she said.
 