
In the decade or so that she has spent at the top of the women's game, Serena 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> has taken special 
pleasure in ruining many a fairytale ending at the grand slams so it was little 
surprise that she should dash Justine Henin's hopes of crowning her comeback 
from retirement by winning the Australian Open here. The American's 6-4, 3-6, 
6-2 triumph gave her a fifth Australian Open title and a 12th grand-slam 
singles win, equalling Billie Jean King on the all-time list of grand-slam 
winners. After accepting her prize, Williams turned to King, who was watching 
inside the Rod Laver Arena and said: "I'm tied with you now Billie. That was my 
goal."

Henin had been trying to emulate the feat of her fellow Belgian Kim Clijsters 
in winning her first grand slam event back after returning from retirement and 
when she reeled off 15 consecutive points from 2-2 in the second set to lead 
1-0 in the decider, the momentum was with her. But Williams righted the ship 
just in time and as Henin's level dropped ever so slightly, she moved in for 
the kill. "I feel like I didn't play the greatest match," Williams said. 
"Physically I wasn't at my best but when the big points came I was able to lift 
my game."

For once, the women's final here lived up to expectations. Both women 
ruthlessly targeted the other's second serve, banging outright winners or 
forcing the other into mistakes. The difference between the two was the 
Williams serve. Not only did she hit 12 aces, but she saved 11 of 16 break 
points, stopping Henin in her tracks just when she thought she was close to the 
finishing line.

Since her return, Henin has spoken of how she intends to be more attacking and 
whenever she could, she tried to rush Williams by attacking with her approach 
shot and finishing off at the net. But it was Williams who struck first, 
breaking in the fourth game on her way to a 4-1 lead. Henin broke back for 4-3 
but watched in anguish as a backhand flicked the top of the net and landed just 
wide to give Williams the first set.

After trading breaks early in the second, Henin sprang to life. Peppering the 
lines with astonishing regularity, she stormed through the rest of the set to 
level the match and when she held serve in the opening game of the third set 
and won the first point of the next game, she had won 15 straight points. She 
had two chances to take a 2-0 lead in the decider but Williams held firm and as 
Henin's form dipped slightly, she took advantage, breaking to lead 3-2 and then 
again two games later, before serving out for victory and collapsing onto her 
back in delight.

American Chris Evert, who is the next on the list with 18, may be a distant 
target but on this form, Williams must have a good chance of adding more 
titles, at least over the rest of the year. US Open champion Clijsters, whose 
shock loss here to Nadia Petrova – when she won just one game – will surely be 
a contender throughout the year, while Henin showed more than enough to suggest 
that she will be a contender for the other three grand-slam title, especially 
the French Open, where she has already won four times.

"Of course I'm disappointed," Henin said. "I had my opportunities but it's 
been almost perfect, just the last step I couldn't make it. I am sure there 
will be positive things to take in the next few days. I was curious about what 
my level would be and how I was going to deal with just the atmosphere on and 
off the court, how it would feel. I felt I took the right decision, so it's 
good enough for me already. I got the results also in the last four weeks — two 
finals — so I can be really happy about that."
 