
Sergio Agüero was the stand-out performer when Manchester City ended their 
tour of the far east with a 3-1victory over a Malaysia XI. The 24-year-old 
Argentina international opened the scoring with a fine first-half solo effort 
before setting up his strike partner Carlos Tevez, and then the winger Adam 
Johnson, to cement the win after the break.

It took Agüero just 17 minutes to make his mark at the Bukit Jalil National 
Stadium in Kuala Lumpur when, having earlier hit the crossbar and forced a save 
from the goalkeeper, Farizal Marlias, he opened the scoring.

The former Atlético Madrid forward surged past three defenders before chipping 
a deft shot past Marlias. Johnson and Tevez went close before half-time and 
although Norshahrul Talaha headed wide for the Malaysians in injury time, City 
went in at the break 1-0 to the good.

The game was effectively over within seven minutes of the restart when Agüero 
fed Tevez to make it 2-0 from a tight angle and then obliged once again to 
allow Johnson to add a third from 12 yards.

Sunderland have been given little encouragement in their pursuit of the 
Wolverhampton Wanderers' striker Steven Fletcher. The Black Cats have tabled a 
bid for the Scotland international as their manager, Martin O'Neill, attempts 
to rebuild his pool of strikers, but the initial response from Wolves was a 
stubborn refusal to talk.

The chief executive, Jez Moxey, told the Wolverhampton Express and Star: "We 
are not getting drawn on offers for players in or out. Our best players are not 
for sale; we want to keep them and build the strongest possible team for the 
season ahead. We will do everything we can to retain the players we want to 
keep and continue to look to strengthen with new signings."

Wolves have signed the Mali international, Tongo Doumbia, on a season-long 
loan fromRennes. The 6ft 3in midfielder moves to Molineux with a view to a 
permanent deal having completed a medical on Friday, and joined his new 
team-mates in training over the weekend.

The Blackburn Rovers striker Leon Best is set for an extended spell on the 
sidelines after suffering anterior cruciate ligament damage on Sunday.

The 25-year-old Republic of Ireland international, a £3m summer signing from 
Newcastle, was carried off before half-time in Rovers' 2-1 friendly win overAEK 
Athens <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aekathens> at Fleetwood. Best had 
put Rovers 2-0 ahead, adding to Nuno Gomes's opener with a fine individual 
effort.

A club statement read: "Rovers are preparing for the start of the Championship 
season without Leon Best after the striker suffered an anterior cruciate 
ligament injury in Sunday's pre-season friendly against AEK Athens."TheBarcelona
 defender Carles Puyol has been given the all-clear after an operation on his 
right knee in May. .

The 34-year-old Spain international had arthroscopic surgery and was ruled out 
for the final weeks of last season, and he missed his nation's triumphant Euro 
2012 campaign in Poland and Ukraine.Barça play pre-season friendlies against 
Paris St-Germain, Manchester United and Dinamo Bucharest before hosting Real 
Sociedad in their opening La Liga match on the weekend of Aug. 18-19.
 