
Growth in Britain's services sector picked up slightly last month but 
companies are still reluctant to hire more workers, a survey revealed on 
Tuesday.

As it emerged that up to 300 jobs are under threat at the life assurance firm 
Friends Life, the monthly survey of purchasing managers (PMI) showed that 
activity increased in the dominant sector of the UK economy in June, at a 
slightly faster rate than in May. Analysts said the data was a relief following
a run of disappointing economic data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/01/uk-manufacturing-growing-slowest-pace>
 in recent weeks.

However, there was disappointment that headcounts remained largely flat, and 
that optimism among services firms has fallen to its lowest level in eight 
months.

Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, which conducted the survey, said: 
"Companies kept headcounts largely unchanged, highlighting a reluctance to 
expand workforces as a result of the uncertain outlook and renewed weakness of 
the manufacturing and household sectors.

"The scope for the private sector to make up for public-sector layoffs 
therefore still looks limited, meaning unemployment could stay stubbornly high 
for some time."

Friends Life, which is owned by Resolution and includes Friends Provident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/friendsprovident>, Axa Life UK and Bupa 
Health Assurance, outlined plans to close its office in Basingstoke, which 
employs 155 people, and merge its two Manchester offices by the end of 2012. 
There are 140 staff at the Manchester Spring Gardens office. While the Unite 
union deplored the loss of "around 280" jobs, the firm said it was too early to 
say how many would be lost.

David Fleming, a Unite national officer, said: "This is devastating news for 
employees who now face another period of great uncertainty. Workers in 
Manchester have faced this before with the many job losses in 2009 when Friends 
Provident moved from the Express Building.

"At that time the then CEO of Friends Provident, Trevor Matthews, said the 
company 'remained committed to its Manchester operations'. Sadly that 
commitment has lasted less than two years.

"Basingstoke staff only joined Friends Life in September 2010 when Resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/resolution> bought Axa's UK Life 
operations. Friends Life has already announced the closure of the previously 
Axa-owned Coventry site. Over 1,000 jobs have already been lost or put at risk 
in the group over the last few years," he said.

The goal of the chancellor, George Osborne, of increasing private-sector 
employment to balance cuts to the state payroll had already been undermined on 
Tuesday bythe loss of 1,400 jobs at Bombardier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/05/bombardier-cuts-1400-jobs-german-rival-contract>
, Britain's last train manufacturer.

The CIPS/Markit survey showed that activity in the services sector rose to 
53.9 in June, up from 53.8 in May. Any number above 50 shows that the sector 
expanded during the month.

Rob Harbron, economist at the Centre for Economics and Business Research, said 
June's growth was "lacklustre". But Philip Shaw of Investec was more 
encouraged, saying the figures should act as a "reality check" against fears 
that the UK economy was deteriorating.

Tuesday's data suggested that overall the UK's gross domestic product grew by 
only 0.3% in the second quarter of 2011. That would follow six months in which 
the economy was in effect flat.

Andrew Goodwin, economic adviser to the Ernst & Young Item Club, said: "It's 
looking likely that second-quarter GDP growth will come in at around 0.3%, 
which would represent a very disappointing outturn for this stage of the 
recovery.

"But once you've factored in the effects of the extra bank holiday and the 
disruption to manufacturing from the Japanese tsunami, it's clear that things 
could have been worse and we expect to see greater momentum build over the 
second half of the year."

Separate PMI data from across Europe showed that the growth in the eurozone 
service sector slowed for the third month running in June, due mainly to 
disappointing new orders. Analysts said the data suggested that economic 
activity across the eurozone was slowing rapidly.

Howard Archer, chief European economist at IHS Global Insight, said: "There 
are also significant concerns about the strength of consumer spending in the 
eurozone as consumers face elevated inflation, still high unemployment, and 
muted wage growth."
 