
Seven people have died and another is missing, presumed dead, after a fishing 
boat capsized near Auckland in an incident that New Zealand police have 
described as a national tragedy.

The Francie charter boat capsized mid-afternoon on Saturday in the Kaipara 
harbour, north-west of Auckland, with 11 people on board.


The 12-metre vessel got into difficulties while attempting to cross a 
treacherous sand bar on the way back to port, triggering a huge rescue 
operation involving police, coastguard and local surf life-saving teams.

One member of the fishing party survived by swimming to shore while two others 
were plucked to safety by helicopter.

But rescuers were unable to save other passengers and five bodies were 
recovered in the first couple of hours of the search, police said. Two more 
bodies were found overnight and one person remains missing, presumed dead, 
police said. One of the victims was the boat’s skipper and owner, Bill McNatty.


Speaking at a media conference on Sunday, Auckland police inspector Mark 
Fergus said: “Three survivors went to hospital and have been discharged and are 
recovering with the family. An investigation is underway, on behalf of the 
coroner.

“We will be assessing if there is any culpability of anyone involved. This is 
a national maritime tragedy.”

Tony Walles, a local charter boat operator, said he heard a call from McNatty 
on the VFX radio about 2.30pm on Saturday, saying he was attempting to cross 
the bar and he expected it would take one hour.


Walles said sea conditions at the time were rough, and getting progressively 
worse, with sea swells rising to 3-4 metres.

None of the other five boats in the harbour attempted the crossing, he said. 



“I am feeling very sad for the people who have departed.” 

Inspector Willi Fanene of Auckland police said everyone on the boat apart from 
the skipper was of Pacific Island nationality – four from Tonga, one from 
Samoa, and one Cook Islander. The missing person was believed to be a Cook 
Islander.

“This is a terrible tragedy for the fishing community and particularly hard 
for the Pacific Island community,” he said. “Officers have been assigned to 
each of the eight families. Grief will be shared through the pacific community, 
but also by all New Zealanders.”


Peseta Sam Lotu-Iiga, New Zealand’s minister for Pacific peoples, said the 
loss would be felt across the region.

“My prayers and deepest sympathies are with the families who now face 
Christmas without their fathers, husbands and sons. This was a group of friends 
who liked to go fishing together from time to time.”





 