
 Aaliyah

 Blackground (Virgin)

 **** 

 £14.99


Aaliyah was originally part of a three-pronged mid-1990s African-American 
teen-brat offensive; Brandy and Monica were the other contenders, butAaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> streaks in front here. Her album is 
as much a brochure for the current state of R&B production facilities as it is 
about Aaliyah's voice.


 With long-time writer and producer Timbaland on board, there are 
scintillating aural textures. We Need a Resolution is a laconic tale of 
relationship bust-up lifted to new heights by a coda of Egyptian horns and 
Aaliyah's bedraggled vocal. So far so state of the art, but the hallmark here 
is a playful and confident reworking of the canon. Rock the Boat pays tribute 
to synth-driven 1980s soul, while Aaliyah's tentative vocal finds its way 
around a menu of high-octane sexual requests.


 I Care 4 U, cowritten by Missy Elliot, is the sort of 1970s style ballad that 
Aaliyah's aunt, Gladys Knight, would approve of - but again it's stripped down 
and rebuilt with layers of haunting keyboard and lo-tech vocal percussion. And 
all this before Try Again (a former American number one), in which Aaliyah's 
fraught, edgy vocal drives a perfect hybrid of pop and R&B. For her and for the 
genre, another coming of age.
 Michael Odell


 Perry Farrell 

Song Yet to Be Sung (Virgin America) 

 *** 

 £14.99


 Perry Farrell was never an artist of particular depth, but he was always too 
smart to implode during his heroin-fuelled Bacchanalian phase, while fatherhood 
and the failure of his most recent band, Porno for Pyros, have brought a new 
self-awareness. Indeed, as if to emphasise his burgeoning softness, his 
two-year-old son Yobel appears, albeit imperceptibly, on the cloyingly 
sentimental Our Song. However, the accountant-led return of Jane's Addiction 
means that Farrell's solo career is effectively beached before it has begun. A 
shame, for Song Yet to Be Sung offers much in itself and promises a brighter 
future. Gone, at last, is Farrell's galumphing take on rock, swapped for a 
cleaner, swirling keyboard-led approach, over which Farrell sneers and howls.


 Although the underwhelming To Me has the lamest reggae beat since CJ Lewis, 
and Admit I is overly fond of the Thompson Twins' You Take Me Up, Farrell has 
embraced the Old Testament's more hedonistic mores: the splendid Happy Birthday 
Jubilee is a clarion call for the 12 tribes to party, and most of its siblings 
resound in explicit or allegorical biblical imagery. Flawed but fascinating.
 John Aizlewood


 Felix da Housecat 

 Kittenz and Thee Glitz (City Rockers)

 **** 

 £13.99


 As is the way with revivals, the current infatuation with the 1980s says more 
about kitschy tailored memories (Miami Vice and Flashdance) than about the 
decade itself. Chicago DJ/producer Felix da Housecat, who referenced Prince and 
Giorgio Moroder on 1999's stunning I Know Electrikboy album, is certainly 
fixated with the era, but this cold, compelling follow-up has a darker purpose. 
The sleeve parodies a Hello! photo-shoot, and the satirical intent informs the 
music: early acid house's rigid pulse underpins the Kraftwerk-inspired, 
minor-chord melancholy of synth-pop.


On the throbbing Silver Screen (Shower Scene), vocalist Miss Kittin intones 
"Sweet seduction in a magazine, endless pleasure in a limousine" with the 
joyless, dead-eyed cool of a model in a 1980s Face fashion shoot. The equally 
blank Happy Hour would have American Psycho's Patrick Bateman cutting a rug. 
Where there is emotion - Walk with Me is music for androids to cry to - it is 
of a decidedly desolate stripe. A sly satire on the cruel vacuousness of the 
"me" decade - and, what's more, one you can dance to - this puts Daft Punk's 
retro gimmickry to shame.
 Dorian Lynsky


 Kekele 

Rumba Congo (Stern's Africa) 

 **** 

 £13.99


 Now here's a familiar-sounding story. A group of veteran musicians, hailed as 
celebrities back when their country was enjoying a "golden era" of popular 
music, decide to get together to revive the old musical styles and re-establish 
their homeland on the world music map. No, not Cuba's Buena Vista Social Club, 
but Kekele, a group of outstanding singers and guitarists from the Congo.


 They don't have Ry Cooder or a Wim Wenders movie to help them, but they too 
have made a fine, refreshingly exuberant new album, a reminder of that classic 
era in the 1960s and 1970s when Congolese dance music was acoustic, light and 
elegant, but still stirring and rhythmic. There are six lead singers featured 
here, including the compelling Nyboma Mwan Dido, but the real stars are the 
guitarists. Papa Noel, now 60, is still in exquisite form, both as guitarist 
and singer, and he's joined by another guitar hero, Syran Mbenza. The songs are 
easy-going and tuneful, helped along by accordion, saxophone and percussion. 
The music that once conquered Africa deserves a revival.
 Robin Denselow


 Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros 

 Global a Go-Go (Hellcat Records) 

 **** 

 £14.99


 For anybody still pining for the deceased Clash, Joe Strummer's latest outing 
should hit the spot admirably. Surrounded by his ruffianly Mescaleros, the old 
groaner bigs it up on a convincing batch of rebel-rockabilly songs with added 
rainbow colourings, with the feisty opening track Johnny Appleseed setting the 
scene with panache. You name it, Strummer's bunch have dug it up somewhere on 
their travels - ska-metal in Cool'n'Out, hopalong Tex-Mex-reggae in Gamma Ray, 
woozy Egyptian skank in Shaktar Donetsk. But it never disintegrates into mere 
musical name-dropping, thanks to the beefiness of the rhythm section (concocted 
from a mixture of gadgets and "real" drums), the bristly clang of the guitars, 
Tymon Dogg's squawking violin and the authority of Strummer's vocals, even when 
he's singing nonsense rhymes. Not sure he needed Roger Daltry on the title 
track, but overall, a triumph.
 Adam Sweeting


 Stanton Warriors 

Stanton Sessions (XL) 

 ***** 


 London's Stanton Warriors are tipped by many in the dance community as those 
most likely to take the UK garage baton and run it past the commercial-cred 
finishing line. As on their own records, their DJ skills combine the sub-bass 
thump of UK garage with the full-throttle hedonism of acid house and the 
strutting bravado of hip-hop. Busta Rhymes has his rhymes spun over an 
underground garage joint, while 1980s electro classics find themselves fitted 
up in modernist breakbeat overcoats. In a world of computer-segued trance-lite, 
Stanton Sessions reminds us that mix albums can be a creative joy in their own 
right, not just a marketing tool for failed dance records or half-cocked 
ambience. High-octane, party-detonating stuff.
 Frank Tope
 