
Mustapha Yatabaré slid in a dramatic equaliser deep into stoppage time to help 
Mali complete an astonishing comeback in the opening match of theAfrica Cup of 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> against the 
hosts, Angola, in Luanda.

Trailing 4-0 with 11 minutes remaining, after a brace from Flávio Amado and 
penalties from Gilberto and Manucho had putAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> firmly in command, Seydou Keita 
gave the Eagles hope when he scrambled the ball in after an error by the 
goalkeeper Carlos Fernandes.

Frédéric Kanouté glanced home a fine header to halve the deficit in the 87th 
minute, before a second from Keita in time added on and Yatabaré's effort 
completed a sensational turnaround which stunned the home fans at the Estadio 
11 de Novembro.

The Barcelona midfielder, Keita, started on the bench after being hampered by 
a thigh injury and also gave away the penalty that led to Angola's fourth goal. 
But after helping to salvage a result he pledged thatMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> would get better as the tournament 
progresses.

"There was a lot of pressure on us," he said. "I conceded a penalty and they 
kept scoring. I just couldn't imagine we could fight back like that. We wanted 
to win but of course we are happy to get a point in the end.

"We were bad in the first half, mentally we weren't really at the races. It 
didn't look like we would get anything but luckily we managed to get a point. 
It's good for us mentally, our confidence, but we have to be careful to not 
make too many mistakes. There is a lot to correct before the next match."

It all looked so different moments earlier after the Black Antelopes had raced 
ahead to help lift a sombre mood on day one of the competition which has been 
marred by the attack on the Togo team which left three people dead.

Manuel José's men began well but were forced into an early change after 23 
minutes when Dédé had to go off with what looked like an ankle injury. His 
replacement Djalma Campos had the best opening of the two sides just after the 
half-hour when he met José Alberto Mabiná's pinpoint cross from the right with 
a powerful header at the near post, which was straight at Mahamadou Sidibe.

The hosts did not have much longer to wait for the opening goal, however, 
which came in the 37th minute, after Manucho was fouled just outside the 
penalty area on the left. Gilberto sought out Flávio from the ensuing 
free-kick, instead of going for goal, and his cross was powerfully met by the 
Al-Shabab striker to leave Sidibe stranded.

The Malians were rocked and it was 2-0 five minutes later when Mabiná found an 
unmarked Flávio with his cross from the right for a second headed goal.

The Eagles began promisingly after the break, with chances falling to 
Mahamadou Diarra and Kanouté but their pressure came to nothing and Angola went 
3-0 up in the 67th minute after a fine counter-attack led to Gilberto being 
brought down by Mamadou Bagayoko in the penalty area.

The Al-Ahly midfielder stood up to take the spot-kick himself, scoring with 
both attempts after he was asked to retake his first one due to players 
entering the box too early.

Seven minutes later Keita bizarrely conceded another penalty when Gilberto was 
for the second time hauled back in the area. This time Manucho stepped forward 
to send Sidibe the wrong way.

Although Mali's hopes appeared slim, they were handed a goal 11 minutes from 
the end when Fernandes spilt a poor corner and Keita bundled the ball in. 
Kanouté then halved the deficit with a powerful header with three minutes left 
and, when the fourth official signalled four additional minutes it seemed to 
deflate the hosts.

Keita's angled finish was followed by Yatabaré's 94th-minute goal – after 
Fernandes could only parry the ball into his path – as Stephen Keshi's side 
completed their dramatic escape.
 