
This article has been rewritten and corrected to reflect further information 
from the SFO

The Serious Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>
 has said it is unable to pursue the Conservative party for the return of 
cheques totalling £365,000 allegedly stolen from Polly Peck by the fraudster 
Asil Nadir and paid into party coffers more than 22 years ago.

In August Nadir was convicted on 10 "specimen counts" of theft relating to 
£29m stolen in the late 1980s from the then FTSE 100 company he ran. But the 
SFO has told the court it believes the true sum he stole was at least £146m – 
even before considering evidence relating to Tory donations.

Today the SFO has powers which allow it to hunt down and confiscate proceeds 
from criminal activity beyond the sums for which a conviction was secured. 
These include powers to seek the return of any tainted gifts. However such 
powers do not apply in the case of Nadir as the relevant legislation became 
active only in 1995 – five years after Polly Peck failed.

In court filings obtained by the Guardian, investigators said "careful 
consideration" had been given to whether they should attempt to trace what 
remains of the £29m – equivalent to almost £60m today – Nadir is convicted of 
stealing. However, the SFO concluded that the cost to the taxpayer of such a 
confiscation action would be too high and the prospect of substantial 
recoveries too low.

Instead, prosecutors have sought a compensation application which requires 
Nadir himself to give an account of his ability to return the £60m. Nadir has 
told the court he is penniless and that the luxury lifestyle he had enjoyed up 
to his conviction had been at the generosity of friends. It is now up to the 
judge to decide if he accepts Nadir's account of his financial position.

Polly Peck administrators and Nadir's trustee in bankruptcy have long held 
that donations to the Conservative party – equivalent to about £700,000 today – 
amounted to illegal transfers from a NatWest bank account in Jersey held in the 
name of a Polly Peck subsidiary. The same account featured during Nadir's 
trial, during which it was said he had repeatedly used it to plunder the FTSE 
100 firm's funds for his own ends in the late 1980s.

The stubs of six cheques totalling £365,000, made out to the Conservative 
Industrial Fund, had been discovered during raids on Nadir's Mayfair address in 
1993 conducted by the Metropolitan police fraud squad on behalf of those 
overseeing his bankruptcy. The payments had not been authorised by the Polly 
Peck board, according to administrators.

The trial of Nadir, who is now serving a 10-year jail sentence, had been 
delayed almost 20 years after he fled Britain in 1993, living for many years as 
a fugitive in Turkish-occupied northernCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>. He returned to the UK to face 
justice in 2010.

The Conservative party has faced repeated calls over the years to return 
tainted donations, but has resisted. "Donations were received from Polly Peck 
companies more than 22 years ago," a spokesman said after Nadir's conviction in 
August. "These were accepted in good faith from what was then considered to be 
a leading British company."

Later that week, however, Lord McAlpine, who had been party treasurer at the 
time the funds were given, broke ranks and insisted the funds were "tainted 
money" and "shames theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> if they hang on to it".

SFO investigators have told the court the millions stolen from Polly Peck 
helped to fund Nadir's extravagant Mayfair lifestyle as well as allowing him to 
lavish generous gifts on friends and relatives.

According to administrators and Nadir's trustee in bankruptcy, among the funds 
transferred without the knowledge of others at Polly Peck were cheques written 
to the Conservative party between 1985 and 1990.

In 1997 the late Lord Harris of Greenwich told the House of Lords there was 
evidence the funds were stolen and called for them to be returned. The Labour 
peer said that the stubs of six cheques totalling £365,000 had been discovered 
during raids on a Nadir property in 1993.

The cheques were from the NatWest Jersey account of Unipac, Polly Peck's 
Cypriot subsidiary. These facts were set out in the late 1990s in a letter to 
Conservative Central Office from administrators from Touche Ross, now part of 
Deloitte.

The letter said: "The investigations confirm that the monies donated by PPI 
[Polly Peck International] were paid on the instructions of Mr Nadir acting 
without the authority of the board of PPI. It is the contention of the 
administrator that Mr Nadir is liable to repay the sums concerned as a result 
of his fraud and/or breach of fiduciary duty and/or malfeasance as a director."

Kevin Hellard, Nadir's trustee in bankruptcy has written to the Conservative 
party following the former Polly Peck boss's conviction, reminding officials of 
his view that the money must be returned. Hellard has not received a response 
and is believed to be considering bringing a civil lawsuit. Even though Nadir 
was discharged from bankruptcy in June, Hellard can still pursue assets held 
before that date.

Before he fled the UK, Nadir, who had been declared insolvent, had become 
notorious for frustrating the efforts of his bankruptcy trustees. On one 
occasion some months before he fled, relations had reached such a low point 
that those conducting a raid on his then home in Eaton Square, Belgravia 
removed an expensive watch from his wrist.

Shortly afterwards, as a birthday present, the then Conservative Northern 
Ireland minister Michael Mates gave him a replacement watch bearing the 
inscription "Don't let the buggers get you down"

Nadir is due to hear tomorrow whether Mr Justice Holroyde orders him to repay 
limited funds stolen from Polly Peck or whether he accepts the former Polly 
Peck boss's claims that he is broke.

• This footnote was added on 20 December 2012. This article replaces a 
previous version which wrongly stated that the SFO had "decided against" 
pursuing the Conservative party for return of funds allegedly stolen from the 
Polly Peck group byAsil Nadir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>
. In fact, powers to confiscate additional proceeds of crime, beyond those for 
which a defendant is convicted, did not become available to the SFO until after 
the date of the offences for which Nadir was found guilty.

The SFO has asked the Guardian to clarify it has never looked into allegations 
of fraud concerning payments from Polly Peck companies to the Conservative 
party. It notes those allegations stemmed from a Metropolitan police fraud 
squad raid on Nadir's home, conducted in 1993 on behalf of his trustee in 
bankruptcy (not by the SFO, as the original article stated). This was a month 
before Nadir fled Britain. At that time Nadir was already facing more than 70 
counts and the SFO was under pressure from the court to slim down the 
indictment to a more manageable size. As a consequence, even if the SFO had 
been aware of cheques to the Conservative party in 1993 – and assuming there 
was sufficient evidence of theft – prosecutors would not have been likely to 
add a count to the indictment.
 