
Acclaimed novelists Margaret Atwood and Howard Jacobson are to write prose 
retellings of Shakespeare's plays as part of a series also including 
interpretations by Anne Tyler andJeanette Winterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanettewinterson>, but so far no author has 
taken up the challenge of rewriting one of the bard's tragedies.

Award-winning novelist and critic Jacobson has chosen The Merchant of Venice, 
one of Shakespeare's most controversial plays, which can be read as 
antisemitic. "For an English novelist, Shakespeare is where it all begins. For 
an English novelist who also happens to be Jewish, The Merchant of Venice is 
where it all snarls up," Jacobson said.

"Only a fool would think he has anything to add to Shakespeare. But 
Shakespeare probably never met a Jew; the Holocaust had not yet happened, and 
antisemitism didn't have a name. Can one tell the same story today, when every 
reference carries a different charge? There's the challenge. I quake before it."

Canadian novelist and critic Atwood, whose latest book, MaddAddam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/08/maddaddam-by-margaret-atwood-review>
, explores gene-splicing between humans and animals, opted for The Tempest. "It 
has always been a favourite of mine, and working on it will be an invigorating 
challenge. Is Caliban the first talking monster? Not quite, but close …" she 
said.

When the new series was unveiled in June, the publishing director of Hogarth 
Shakespeare,Clara Farmer, told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/27/shakespeare-reworked-jeanette-winterson-anne-tyler>
: "We hope to do the entire canon … we need people to step up for the 
tragedies."

Tyler chose a comedy, The Taming of the Shrew, and Winterson picked The 
Winter's Tale.

Farmer has secured world rights in all languages for Atwood's and Jacobson's 
retellings, and is in conversation with a number of other writers. But so far 
no author has signed up for the challenge of Romeo and Juliet, Julius Caesar, 
Hamlet, King Lear or Macbeth; or any of Shakespeare's other tragedies.

Hogarth Shakespeare is part of Penguin Random House Group; the original 
Hogarth Press was established by Virginia Woolf and her husband Leonard in 
1917, and went on to publish significant works including TS Eliot's The Waste 
Land, joining forces with Chatto & Windus publishing house in 1946. The Hogarth 
Shakespeare series will launch in 2016, coinciding with the 400th anniversary 
of Shakespeare's death.
 