
Shane Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-watson> is confident 
he’ll be ready for the Test series decider against South Africa.

Selectors are yet to declare their intent, but Watson shapes as a likely 
inclusion given the side’s batting woes and overworked bowlers in the second 
Test loss in Port Elizabeth.

Watson, who has recovered from a persistent calf injury, will hold nothing 
back when Australia have their one and only training session before the third 
Test starts in Cape Town on Saturday.

The 32-year-old, told he needs to bowl to warrant national selection, sent 
down five overs of medium pace off a full run-up in the nets on Monday. Watson 
will step it up further at Newlands.

“Next time I bowl on Thursday I’ll be bowling at match intensity,” he said. “I 
have to bowl one more time to be declared fit to play and then it is up to the 
selectors. I shouldn’t have any problems about getting through another bowling 
session.”

Watson described his latest setback as frustrating, but noted the unwanted 
time off has been of major benefit.

“It gave me a chance to get my body right,” he said. “I obviously had a few 
niggles during the summer I played with.

“It [not rushing back and playing the second Test as a batsman] has actually 
worked out better because when I come back this time those niggles will have 
gone away.”

Watson had no idea where he would bat if called on, saying he was just as 
happy at No6 as No3.

“I’ve been able to bat in all different positions through my career so I’ll be 
able to adapt quickly,” he said.

The all-rounder was also in the dark about how many overs he’d be called on to 
bowl, if selected.

Watson has form at Newlands, having taken 5-15 from five overs in 2011, but 
given the incredible collapse that followed it’s a match he has tried to erase 
from his memory.

“It’d be nice if that happened again, and the conditions were the same. But 
not the back part of that [Test],” he said of the game where Australia were 
skittled for 47 en route to an eight-wicket loss.

“The wicket has normally got a bit of seam and swing in it for the first 
couple of days. I know if I’m fit and get picked that my bowling could be 
pretty suited to it.”
 