 Axon, an e-commerce company based in Surrey, was yesterday celebrating a 
potential £1m gain from the Budget after the chancellor promised action to 
remove a Catch-22 problem that has left start-up companies creaking under huge 
national insurance liabilities.
Until yesterday Axon <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axongroup> was 
facing a £1m bill to pay for employer's NI when its staff exercise share 
options. Last year its NI liability was just £200,000, but as Axon's share 
price has jumped 500% over the past year, the liability in the next tax year 
would be £1m, mak ing a massive dent in its profits of £4.5m.

The company, which started in 1995 and now employs 200 people, designs 
business-to-business solutions for blue-chip clients such as Orange and BP 
Amoco.

The issue has hit thousands of small internet start-ups which have used share 
options as an incentive to staff and have seen their share prices soar. 
Accountants have warned that many are effectively insolvent as a result of 
having to put aside reserves for future NI payments on options when they are 
exercised.

But the chancellor said yesterday that he will begin an ur gent consultation 
exercise to reduce the NI burden. Early indications are that employers will be 
allowed to transfer their NI liability on to employees. An employee exercising 
an option is likely in future to have to pay not just the marginal tax rate but 
also their employer's NI bill of 11.7%, producing a maximum tax bill of 51.7%.

Axon finance director Robin Halliday said: "It sounds like very positive news 
for employers, but the devil is in the detail. NI has been a huge issue for us; 
it's been like a tax on success. We're excited about what he's promising, but 
you often find with budgets that when you look at the fine print, what you 
originally expected is not there."

But the extra tax burden on staff means that employers are likely to be forced 
to grant extra options to compensate, warned tax specialist Rose Edmunds of 
accountants Grant Thornton.

Ernst & Young also warned that some companies could still be bankrupted if 
employees exercise their share schemes before any new rules come into force. 
"The NI problem is going to go through a lingering death. If employees sell 
their shares tomorrow, some companies are still going to face enormous bills."
 