
Speaking a year before he died, at the age of 89 in 2013, Anthony Caro 
complained about being badgered towrite an autobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/mar/16/anthony-caro-life-in-sculpture]>
. "I couldn't think of anything worse," he said. "I want to look forward, not 
back. I've always kept going by thinking about tomorrow, not yesterday." It is 
a philosophy evidenced in a long career that began with figurative sculpture in 
clay and plaster when he was an assistant to Henry Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/henry-moore>, before moving to abstract 
sculpture in steel. Then came his bold removal of the plinth from sculpture, 
putting the work on the same level as the viewer, and the painting of his 
muscular yet airy works in bright colours. He went on to work with bronze, 
lead, wood and paper. In the last two years of his life, he began to explore 
the possibilities of Perspex, a material he had barely worked with before. The 
results will be on show in an exhibition of his final works opening next week 
in London. "The fact that, shortly before his death, Caro decided to turn his 
hand to a new material offers us, in hindsight," writes Alastair Sooke in the 
catalogue essay, "a final flourish that completely sums him up."

But alongside Caro's impressive forward propulsion and enthusiasm for change, 
there were also elements of great consistency. Not least the "64-year 
conversation about art" that he conducted with his wife, the painter and 
collagist Sheila Girling who was an integral influence on both his life and art 
from the beginning of his career. In the early 60s it was Girling who chose the 
colour red – and applied the paint to the sculpture herself – for one of Caro's 
most important works, "Early One Morning", a key piece in the ground-breaking 
1963 show at London's Whitechapel Gallery that shot him to fame. Five decades 
later, Girling is still making important contributions to his work and she 
chose the blue for the disc used in "Blue Moon", one of the Perspex and steel 
sculptures in the new show.
 Caro’s Blue Moon (2013). Photograph: John Hammond 
"Tony was into form," Girling says of Caro in the early 60s. "And he really 
didn't care what colour a form took, as long as the form was right. But when he 
then wanted to make steel look less like steel he first painted "Early One 
Morning" green. It looked terrible and I told him so. I said it had to be red. 
And he replied, in his characteristic way: 'Really? OK. Red it is.' That's the 
way he was. He bounced off people and would always be asking 'What do you 
think?'"

Girling says it was another "bouncing off", after a conversation in Venice, 
that prompted Caro to attempt to work in glass, which led to the Perspex works 
of his last years. "The things he wanted to achieve with glass proved very 
difficult. He couldn't cut it into the shapes he wanted. It began to crack and 
break. But Perspex has the same transparency and can be cut. That's how it 
began." The new work combined wood and steel with Perspex, and allowed Caro 
to pay homage to other artists – two pieces are inspired byCézanne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cezanne>'s painting of card players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/19/paul-cezanne-card-players-exhibition>
 – as well as to experiment with colour.

When Caro died unexpectedly after a heart attack, much of the work had been 
completed, but it was left to Girling to choose exactly what shade of blue the 
Perspex in "Blue Moon" would be painted. She identified it from a string of 
samples Caro had taken to wearing, "like a sort of necklace", as he put the 
pieces together in the studio. "I didn't hand paint it myself this time, but I 
was pretty sure it was the right colour and what Tony would have wanted. After 
all that time together we were pretty in touch with each other and the way our 
minds worked."

Girling is speaking in the studio space she and Caro shared in Camden, north 
London. The heavy metal work for the sculptures was done in a former piano 
factory, while she and Caro worked – her upstairs, him down – in the next-door 
building, which used to be the Dunhill pipe factory. "They were still in 
business when Tony first came here in 1969 and they'd give him a pipe as a 
present every Christmas."

In Camden, Caro and Girling would continually discuss each other's work. "He 
would say to 'Give me an hour before you go home', and we'd talk about what 
we'd been doing that day. He'd say 'What do you think?' and I'd say you should 
cut a bit off there, and he'd say 'No, that's where I wanted it.' But other 
times he would say that I was right. I used to wait until I was pretty sure of 
my work before I'd ask him up to look at it. He was always so emphatic about 
things, which I couldn't cope with too early because it might put me off. But 
he was terribly helpful and we relied on each other's eye. In a way it was a 
chat between two eyes."

Girling had exhibited a discerning eye regarding Caro's work before they even 
met at the Royal Academy schools in 1948. "I visited the sculpture school and, 
looking at all the students' work, I thought there were only two real artists 
in the place. They turned out to be Tony, andFrank Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/mar/02/guardianobituaries.education>" 
(later head of the sculpture department at St Martin's art school and the 
person who employed Caro there as an influential tutor). Caro and Girling met 
when Caro used Girling's personal drawing board: "He said he thought anyone 
could use them, which was never the case. Then, when he was apologising, he 
made some outlandish remark about art and we started arguing. So he said 'Let's 
have lunch and talk about it more' and that started it."
 Caro's Early One Morning (1962). Credit: Royal Academy Of Arts/PA 
Six months later they were married. "Tony wanted to do it in three. When he 
makes up his mind, it happens! I did manage to get him up to six months, but no 
longer. There were some complications, although not for us, in that Tony was 
Jewish, but his family were never strict – his father would allow the ham to be 
carved on the sideboard, but not on the table."

Girling was from a much more arty background than Caro, whose father was a 
stockbroker. There were several professional artists on her mother's side and 
an art dealer on her father's, "who was an old rogue, apparently, with a big 
studio at the back of his gallery where young artists would paint old masters. 
My mother's father knew of his reputation and described them as a 'very 
worldly' family."

Although Girling was brought up with art all around her, she says she 
initially wanted to study science but her mother worried that she'd "catch too 
many germs in a hospital" and so insisted she go to art school, "so long as I 
promised that I would never marry an artist. My grandfather, who was 
a well-known Midlands artist, had never made a tremendous amount of money and 
it was his mother who really had to keep everybody."

So Girling attended Birmingham School of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> before going on to the Royal 
Academy schools where she won the gold medal for painting and silver medal for 
portraiture. After marrying Caro, she continued to study until their first son, 
Tim, now a zoologist working in California, was born in 1951. "There was a very 
friendly doorman who used to write our names down as we went in and I just kept 
using Miss Girling so as not to cause confusion. Eventually he had to ask: 'Is 
Miss Girling married?'."

Though Girling stopped exhibiting while her children grew up – their second 
son, Paul, now also a painter, was born in 1958 – she never stopped drawing, 
and made sketches of her children as well as of Caro, a habit she kept up until 
the end with her last drawing of her husband made just a week before he died 
(pictured left). "I was just sitting at the other end of the table and saw he 
was asleep. I've done a lot of Tony over the years, but that was the last one."
 A drawing of Caro by Girling (2013) 
She also maintained a keen and practical interest in art and the art world. As 
a young couple they had moved to Much Hadham in Hertfordshire when Caro worked 
with Henry Moore at his studio there. They then went back to London and lived 
in a converted stable in Hampstead. The house had been designed by 
"the brutalist architects"Alison and Peter Smithson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/sep/11/lecorbusier-architecture> 
– "who were very clever about putting staircases where you wouldn't expect 
them" – and Caro used the garage as his studio.

"In those days we were living fairly near the edge. Tony had no helpers and 
I would physically paint some of the sculptures, including 'Early One Morning'. 
We were working and living together then and we sort of carried on the same way 
ever since."

Caro's move to America in the mid-60s, to a teaching job in Bennington, 
Vermont, was a crucial part of his artistic development, and it was also 
important for Girling. "I learned an awful lot, although I wasn't painting 
myself. I was talking art as well as visiting studios. The artistKenneth Noland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/08/kenneth-noland-obituary>, 
who became a friend, showed me acrylic paints, which I'd never seen used 
before. I learned how to mix them and saw what you could do with them. All the 
time I kept in touch."

Eventually, she says, "the children had grown up and you ask yourself 'Am I 
just going to sit at home and wash dishes?'". But it wasn't until the late 70s, 
nearly 30 years after she had last exhibited at the Royal Academy schools, that 
Girling had another exhibition. "For a while it was terribly daunting. I even 
went into analysis for a time to try and get rid of the block. It didn't help. 
In the end you get so sick of saying 'I can't do it' over and over again that 
you wonder why you are wasting all this money just to say it to someone else. 
You just have to get on with it, which I eventually did."

So she took the upstairs space in the old pipe factory and, whenever they were 
both there, they would have lunch together. She would then leave the studio in 
the late afternoon, with Caro following an hour or two later. "Tony was a man 
from a period when men just didn't cook, so I'd generally start the dinner and 
he'd come in at about 6.30 and have 'one lovely whisky', which was his only 
drink of the day. Even when he was on his way home after trips away he would 
phone and say 'Get the whisky out, I've got so much to tell you'. We always 
shared the same humour and the same interests." Girling says the last time she 
saw Caro, as ever looking forward, was when he left to go to a medical 
appointment. "Our son was over from America and as Tony was dropped off at the 
clinic his last words to me were 'We'll have a Chinese with the boys tonight'."

She says: "It ended too soon, but it was a good life", and that she now has so 
much to do with both his and her work. Since suffering a small stroke, she has 
– likeMatisse <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/matisse> before her – 
started to make paper cutouts because, she says, paper is physically easier to 
move around than painted pieces of canvas. She is also illustrating a book by 
Tim Caro, about zebras. "Did you know that every single one has different 
stripes? They are like fingerprints so I have to be very accurate."

Girling and Caro's work still stands next to each other's in the studio they 
shared. Since she began exhibiting again she has featured in more than 
50 shows, sometimes alongside her husband, although she "never wanted to 
exhibit together too often because I always wanted to be separate". But seeing 
the work together, in the space where they both worked for so long, does she 
think they somehow speak to each other? "I suppose they must do in some way; 
you can't live together and work together for such a long time without 
it brushing off somewhere."

• Anthony Caro: The Last Sculptures 
<http://www.annelyjudafineart.co.uk/exhibitions/anthony-caro> is at Annely 
Juda Fine Art, 23 Dering Street, London W1, from 11 September.Anthony Caro, a 
monograph, 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780714867359>
 will be published by Phaidon in October.
 