
Shelagh Delaney was 18 when she wrote A Taste of Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-taste-of-honey>, one of the defining plays 
of the 1950s working-class and feminist cultural movements. The play's group of 
dysfunctional characters, utterly alien to the prevailing middle-class "anyone 
for tennis?" school of theatre, each explored their chances of attaining a 
glimpse of happiness. The central character, a young girl named Jo, lives in a 
decrepit flat in Salford with her mother, who is apt to wander off in pursuit 
of men with money. Jo becomes pregnant by a black sailor and is cared for by 
Geoffrey, a young gay friend, until her mother ousts him in what could be a 
burst of suppressed maternal love or a display of jealous control-freakery.

Delaney, who has died of cancer aged 71, had to endure harsh criticism for her 
attack on the orthodoxies of the period. Her play was innovative in breaking 
several taboos discreetly observed by the likes of Noël Coward and Terence 
Rattigan, in whose dramas working-class characters generally appeared as chirpy 
subsidiaries and who mostly presented women as either madonnas or sluts. A 
Taste of Honey showed working-class women from a working-class woman's point of 
view, had a gay man as a central and sympathetic figure, and a black character 
who was neither idealised nor a racial stereotype.

The play opened on 27 May 1958 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2003/sep/10/theatre2>, at the Theatre Royal 
Stratford East, in London, where its success owed a great deal toJoan Littlewood
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2002/sep/23/guardianobituaries.arts>, who did 
much to mother both playwright and play. In Salford, where Delaney was born, 
the council fumed that the portrayal was an insult to the town — but when it 
became a runaway success, and Delaney a national celebrity, she was asked for 
her manuscript copy for its library. The feisty Delaney, who disliked being 
called a "six-footer" (she was 5ft 11in) called them hypocrites, and gave the 
original script to Littlewood instead.
 Rita Tushingham and Paul Danquah in Tony Richardson's film of A Taste of 
Honey. Photograph: The Ronald Grant Archive 
A Taste of Honey moved to the Wyndham's theatre, in the West End, in 1959. 
Delaney received the Charles Henry Foyle award for best new play and an Arts 
Council England bursary. In the same year, she sold the film rights for 
£20,000, then a considerable sum. The film, which she scripted with the 
director Tony Richardson, and which starred Rita Tushingham as Jo, Dora Bryan 
as her mother and Murray Melvin as Geoffrey, was released in 1961. It won four 
Bafta awards, including best British screenplay and best British film. 
Tushingham won a Bafta for best newcomer and received an award at Cannes, as 
did Melvin.

Delaney was firmly launched on a playwright's career, but her subsequent work 
never achieved an impact as great as her groundbreaking debut. The familiar 
difficulty of writing a second hit bore down especially hard on her, not least 
because her first play had succeeded due to its apparent unselfconscious 
spontaneity. High expectations were disappointed with The Lion in Love, which 
was produced in 1960 at the Belgrade theatre, in Coventry, and transferred to 
the Royal Court in London later that year.

Conservative critics such as WA Darlington did not like this portrayal of 
another northern family: a hard-drinking mother, a husband lacking the courage 
to leave her and a son choosing to quit home for Australia. However, a new 
breed of critics represented byBernard Levin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2004/aug/10/pressandpublishing.guardianobituaries>
 were more encouraging. "The fact is, Miss Delaney is not only a shrewd and 
penetrating observer; she is a very delicate artist," wrote Levin.

Delaney's background made A Taste of Honey and The Lion in Love 
autobiographical, at least in spirit. She had Irish grandparents, one of them 
an ardent socialist. Her father was a bus inspector and an avid reader and 
storyteller. He would recount with flair his experiences in the Lancashire 
Fusiliers in north Africa.

Among the most vivid experiences of Delaney's childhood were going to the 
Salford Hippodrome and to the cinema, sometimes three times a week. She 
attended three primary schools, failed the 11-plus and attended secondary 
school in Broughton, Lancashire, where the headteacher encouraged her to watch 
the school production of Othello. She was 12 and had already realised that she 
could write better than the other pupils in the class. Her interest in drama 
waxed as her interest in school work waned. She made three half-hearted 
attempts to transfer to the local grammar school but got there only at the age 
of 15. She left at 17 and had little interest in studying to be a teacher, the 
most realistic career path on offer. Instead, she took dead-end jobs as a clerk 
in a milk depot, a shop assistant, an usherette at Manchester opera house and a 
worker in the research photography department of the electrical engineering 
company Metropolitan-Vickers.

A Taste of Honey began as a novel but Delaney, as she later admitted, was soon 
too busy going out dancing and socialising to produce an 80,000-word book. A 
play seemed better attuned to her impulsive talent, and when she saw Rattigan's 
Variations On a Theme on tour, she thought she could do better. She took a 
fortnight off and wrote A Taste of Honey.

Her subsequent career was mercurial and chequered. In 1960 A Taste of Honey 
opened on Broadway in New York – with Joan Plowright as Jo and Angela Lansbury 
as her mother – and ran for almost a year, with Plowright winning a Tony award 
for her performance. In the UK, the short BBC Monitor documentaryShelagh 
Delaney's Salford <http://www.screenonline.org.uk/tv/id/1284964/>, directed by 
Ken Russell, profiled the author in her home town.

In 1963, a book of her short stories, Sweetly Sings the Donkey, was published. 
Gradually she began to move towards films and television rather than the stage, 
a transition which she said was fine when it worked – but it often didn't. Her 
screenplay for Lindsay Anderson's film The White Bus (1967) dealt with an 
enigmatic young girl from the north who retreats from her disastrous office 
life in London to view her home town as a visitor on a sightseeing bus. She 
also wrote Charlie Bubbles (1967), starring Albert Finney – who also directed – 
as a writer running out of material and behaving in obsessive and destructive 
ways; the film became something of a cult movie in its quietly bizarre way. Her 
television plays in the 1970s included Did Your Nanny Come from Bergen?, St 
Martin's Summer and The House That Jack Built, a six-parter for the BBC in 1977 
that was subsequently staged in New York.

She continued to write new material, including the radio plays So Does the 
Nightingale (1980) and Don't Worry About Matilda (1983), but her earlier work 
continued to gain greater attention. Lines from A Taste of Honey were adopted 
in lyrics by the Smiths and shefeatured on the cover 
<http://www.passionsjustlikemine.com/disc/girlfriendinacoma.htm> of the group's 
1987 single Girlfriend in a Coma. A Taste of Honey was revived by the 
Roundabout theatre company in New York in 1981 with a Tony-nominated Amanda 
Plummer as Jo.

Delaney had a new success with her screenplay for Dance With a Stranger 
(1985), based on the life of Ruth Ellis, who was hanged in 1955 for shooting 
her lover. The film was directed by Mike Newell and starred Miranda Richardson 
as Ellis. Delaney's subsequent work included the films Three Days in August 
(1992) and The Railway Station Man (1992) and the radio plays Tell Me a Film 
(2003) and Country Life (2004). She was made a fellow of the Royal Society of 
Literature in 1985.

Delaney is survived by her daughter, Charlotte, and her grandchildren, Max, 
Gable and Rosa.

• Shelagh Delaney <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/shelagh-delaney>, 
playwright and scriptwriter, born 25 November 1939; died 20 November 2011
 