
Many students have no trouble adapting to their new university’s culture. They 
don togas in freshers’ week, assemble their ultimate squad by the end of year 
one, and make the most of the next few years until a cushy grad scheme picks 
them up at the end of it.

Others, however, will spend their first term fantasising about how great life 
would be anywhere other than the lonely fourth floor of their halls.

In the past, unhappy students pretty much had to find a way to like it or lump 
it. But now the government is in the process of making iteasier to switch 
university 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/26/flexible-terms-students-swap-university-bill>
. The aim is to increase competition and encourage social mobility. Although 
the number of student making the change is currently low –fewer than 7,000 
students switched institution in 2013-14, out of about 400,000 UK undergraduates
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/26/flexible-terms-students-swap-university-bill>
 – it’s likely to increase. So if you’re feeling like you just want out, here’s 
what you might want to consider first:

Is it you or is it the uni?

Some people have their heart set on going to a certain place. They love the 
city, they’ve planned their internships and they know exactly how they’re going 
to spend their weekends. But if you didn’t get into your first-choice 
university, and you end up, reluctantly, at an unfamiliar campus in a faraway 
town, then life can feel unfair.

Want to make a difference at university? Join the clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/21/want-to-make-a-difference-at-university-join-the-clubs>
“I had a fine time – met two of my closest friends – but my heart was never in 
it,” says Charlotte Jones, who switched from Southampton to Queen Mary’s in 
London at the end of her first year. “Not getting into my first-choice 
universities was really difficult – it was my first real taste of 
disappointment, and I hadn’t expected it. I think, in a way, it was immaturity 
that led me back to London. Southampton wasn’t my first choice of uni and I 
couldn’t accept the change of plans, or adapt to them.”

Change can be expensive

It’s important to be aware that there are financial implications to switching 
university. Manuel Souto-Otero, a senior lecturer in social sciences at Cardiff 
University who prepared a report in 2013 for the Higher Education Academy on 
credit transfer, says moving university can ending up costing you. “People may 
have established connections – found a flat, got a job – and these are 
additional costs. You will need to check with the student loans company and 
this is something you might have to take into account when making your 
decision.”

Kirsty Bradbury, who moved from Bournemouth University to Southampton Solent 
at the end of her first year partly because of poor health, has experience of 
this. Although pleased she made the move, she says sorting her student finances 
was stressful and complicated. “I was originally given less funding because the 
course was deemed to be shorter, but I kept getting told different things by 
advisers,” she says. “There need to be much clearer guidelines when it comes to 
changing courses.”

Leaving can be awkward

Sod’s law dictates you will suddenly start to have a brilliant time once 
you’ve decided to leave your university. And then there’s the decision of how 
exactly you tell your new friends. Do you backdoor it? Do you have one last big 
night out?

Jones says the process can be uncomfortable. “It was an awkward situation 
where I’d umm’d and ah’d about leaving, and on a whim signed a contract for a 
second-year house with seven friends, so I had to pull out at the last minute 
and spend ages trying to find someone to fill my room,” she says. “My friends 
in Southampton were all pissed off with me and didn’t understand why I wanted 
to move. It was like an attack on them. They thought that I thought I was 
better than them.”

George the Poet's message to freshers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/13/george-the-poets-message-to-freshers>
Try not to leave it late

Making a snap decision is scary but wasting a year thinking “what if” is no 
good either. According to Souto-Otero, it’s easier if people change very early 
on.

“It can be done through Ucas if it’s in the first days, but if it goes beyond 
that, it gets a little bit more difficult. You have to contact the new uni 
directly to see if they have a place available,” he says. “It can be easier to 
change courses within your uni, rather than moving away.”

You could trade up – or down

The idea that you can transfer to a more reputable university is something the 
government mentioned in the white paper, in order to help under-represented 
groups who are more likely to have landed up at a uni for which they are 
over-qualified.

Emran Mian, director of the Social Market Foundation and a former director of 
strategy at the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, expects 
switching between universities to become more common among those who do 
exceptionally well in first year.

“It’s most likely to be young people who perhaps didn’t get into their 
university of first choice right away, perhaps because their exam results 
weren’t quite strong enough, or they didn’t feel confident about doing well in 
a more competitive university. Perhaps their aspirations have risen, or career 
choices clarified, during their first year. This group of students will be 
looking to trade up.”

Then there are those who are struggling, and might want to move in the 
opposite direction – away from a selective university or a very demanding 
course. “Switching courses, for this group, is a better alternative than 
dropping out of higher education entirely,” says Mian.

Consider staying local

If you don’t want to uproot your life entirely then it’s worth considering 
changing where you study but not where you live. Mian thinks that at the end of 
first year students are often settled. “They have established friendships, 
perhaps got a job. Some might want to consider moving to a university in the 
same city or region rather than further afield,” he says.

Of course it is possible that leaving the area is exactly what you want - to 
reunite with schoolfriends, follow a partner to another university or just to 
make a fresh start.

Will your work translate?

The challenge in moving universities will be transferring credits for the 
courses you have already completed. However, if universities are actively 
recruiting switchers – either to increase their numbers or to improve the 
diversity of their student body – then it’s likely they will make it easy for 
incoming students to bring credits with them.

“Either that, or they will ask them to take an additional course or two during 
second year to bring them up to the same base as existing students,” says Mian.

Whatever you choose, you’re not a failure

When you switch direction, you might feel judged by those who think you lack 
perseverance.

“Uni is seen as something you see through, and if you deviate it is something 
that hasn’t gone according to plan,” says Souto-Otero. Don’t let this hold you 
back. With the increase in tuition fees, the practice of switching courses is 
likely to become far more common, and there’s more reason than ever to put 
yourself first and make a decision that is right for you.

For Jones, changing the plan wasn’t easy but ultimately it was the right 
choice. “My switch resulted in brilliant work experience and part-time jobs 
that were crucial for my career. And I made some really good friends – in the 
end. But all these things took a while to realise and at the time it was awful, 
and lonely.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 