
Q I have been told I can raise money using an equity release scheme but don't 
understand what's involved, except that the extra money comes from my house. It 
sounds a good idea, but I have read a lot of stories in the press warning 
against these schemes. I am 66 and most of my income comes from pensions - 
private and government - that only just cover my expenditure.

A You are quite right to be cautious. There has been a massive rise in the 
sale of equity release schemes in recent years. This reflects the fact that 
property values have rocketed, while the return on low-risk savings like cash 
and on annuities have fallen to low levels. As a result lots of pensioners are 
struggling to make ends meet. So it can make sense to consider turning some of 
the capital value of your house into cash.

Another potential attraction of equity release is that your beneficiaries will 
pay less inheritance tax (IHT) because the value of your estate has been 
reduced. This, of course, is only an issue if your estate is likely to exceed 
the IHT threshold of £275,000 - set to rise to £300,000 in the next two years. 
The tax saving means the government will effectively pay at least some of the 
cost of the equity release plan.

There are basically two types of equity release schemes: home reversion plans 
and loans. A home reversion plan involves selling all, or a percentage share, 
of your house, but continuing to live in it. When the property is eventually 
sold - on your death or when you move into a care home - the reversion company 
will take its share of the sale price. If you have sold 100% of your interest 
in the property, the company will keep all of the profits.

This is a pretty drastic measure, because it involves the sale of the family 
home to a third party. And it is really only viable for older people - mainly 
those over 80 years of age - because the price offered for your home depends on 
how long the reversion company may have to wait before getting its money back 
from the sale of the property. The price offered is likely to be well below the 
current market value, particularly if the company thinks you have a good few 
years left in you.

You are allowed to remain in the house for the rest of your life, even if you 
have sold a 100% stake, but you are responsible for maintaining the property 
even though you no longer own it, and there is also the possibility of being 
charged a notional rent.

Equity release <https://www.theguardian.com/money/equity-release> shemes - 
where you take out a loan or mortgage against the value of your house - are 
more popular and there are several versions available. Roll-up mortgages 
involve taking out a loan on which no interest or capital is repaid until the 
house is sold. The interest on the loan, which is usually set at a fairly high 
level, is rolled up and added to the capital value.

But compounding the interest in this way means that the total loan can 
increase at a frightening rate over the years. People tend to think they are 
only paying the agreed rate of interest, forgetting that the sum they pay 
interest on will in fact increase each year. Equity release companies who are 
members of Ship (Safe Home Income Plans) will guarantee that the value of the 
compounded loan will never exceed the value of your home, avoiding the kinds of 
problems seen in the l980s. Nevertheless roll-up schemes could wipe out a huge 
chunk of the value of your property if you live for a long time.

Other equity release mortgage schemes include interest-only loans, where you 
have to make interest payments but the capital does not have to be repaid until 
your house is sold. Another variation on the theme is the home income plan. 
This is based on a roll-up mortgage or reversion scheme and provides a 
guaranteed level of income, which comes from an annuity bought with the 
released sum. These are particularly suitable for those suffering from ill 
health and qualifies them to purchase an impaired life annuity that may pay a 
considerably higher rate, providing extra income to help fund care costs.

With all these schemes the important point to bear in mind is how you are 
going to use the money, which is being borrowed at a relatively high rate of 
interest. Investing in a stock market based scheme may provide good returns, 
but it has a high element of risk, and may provide capital growth rather than 
income. These are often recommended by financial advisers who are mainly 
motivated by the commission they receive on investments and just hope that 
their clients will not suffer heavy losses.

As you suggest, equity release schemes have received bad press. One of the 
leading insurance groups was recently rapped over the knuckles by the Financial 
Services Authority for advertising its equity release scheme as a way to pay 
for a world cruise or a yacht. However, you can't take the money with you when 
you go. And as long as you are aware of the high price you - or your 
beneficiaries - are liable to pay for an equity release arrangement, then it 
can be an attractive prospect for enhancing the quality of your life now by 
using some of the capital tied up in your home.

Effectively this will mean leaving a reduced amount to your beneficiaries, and 
this has to be taken into consideration. If you have no beneficiaries, or are 
not concerned about how much is passed on to the next generation, there is a 
case for using an equity release scheme to boost your day-to-day income or for 
some of the luxuries you haven't been able to afford.

Bear in mind that equity release schemes are high-risk products and you should 
take advice before you make any decision about whether to use them. Often there 
are cheaper alternatives, such as downsizing to a smaller property. But if you 
don't want to move, equity release schemes can provide a way of unlocking the 
unused value in your home.
 