
Q I have been told by the company providing my small personal pension plan 
that I should consider "contracting in" to the second state pension scheme. I 
haven't a clue what they are talking about. Is it a good idea and what is 
involved?

A At least you have been given the choice. Some of the big insurance companies 
have automatically transferred investors in "appropriate personal pensions" 
back into the state scheme, but this approach is not necessarily right for 
everyone. To help make up your mind it is useful to know the background to your 
pension provider's question.

There are two separate state pension schemes: the basic pension scheme, based 
on the number of years for which you pay national insurance, and the second 
state pension scheme (known as S2P). This is the successor to the state 
earnings related pension scheme (Serps), which was originally introduced to 
provide a "top up" to the basic state pension scheme and aimed at workers whose 
employers did not provide a pension.

S2P is also funded out of national insurance contributions but these vary 
according to how much you earn which means the pension is potentially worth 
more to higher earners. And, unlike the contributions that fund the basic state 
pension, these are optional. If you have a private pension you can decide to 
"contract out" and receive a rebate of national insurance payments into your 
scheme. Many occupational pension schemes decided to "contract out" and used 
the contributions to provide a guaranteed minimum pension to scheme members.

The general view was that the private sector could provide much better 
pensions than the state run scheme. But things have changed. A recent report by 
the Financial Services Authority (FSA) concluded that those who contracted out 
could be an average of £4 a week worse off when they retire than had they opted 
to stay in S2P.

There are several reasons for this underperformance. A major blow was Gordon 
Brown's decision to scrap advanced corporation tax, removing one of the major 
tax advantages enjoyed by private sector pension funds. It is estimated this 
has cost the pension industry around £5bn a year. Poor stock market performance 
in recent years, low inflation and low interest rates have also taken their 
toll on pension funds, reducing potential growth rates. And the national 
insurance rebates available to savers have been cut.

Put all these factors together and you can see why investors are being 
strongly urged to contract back into the state scheme. Insurance companies are 
frightened that they may be accused of giving bad advice by continuing to 
accept national insurance contributions into personal plans. Some have reacted 
by automatically contracting investors back into the state scheme, while others 
- like your company - have left the decision up to individuals with a 
recommendation to consider contracting back in.

You can decide at any time to "contract in" again to S2P and stop receiving 
the national insurance rebate, although rebates are paid on an annual basis so 
there is no difference between contracting in now or on the last day of the tax 
year.

There are arguments for contracting in: the amount of pension you receive from 
S2P is not dependent on investment performance or variations in the cost of 
annuities. Furthermore, like the basic state pension, it rises each year in 
line with inflation as measured by the retail prices index. It is, therefore, a 
pretty generous deal.

However there is also a case for contracting out. The main problem with S2P is 
the lack of flexibility, although it can be deferred for a number of years, 
nothing can be paid out until you reach the official retirement age. In 
contrast private pensions can be taken out from age 50 - rising to 55 by 2010 - 
and offer investors the opportunity to take a tax-free lump sum on retirement. 
After April 6 next year, single people will also be able to bequeath a 
contracted-out pension "pot" to their heirs.

The greater flexibility of private pensions is of particular use to people 
with medical problems, possibly resulting in reduced life expectancy. They can 
take the pension when it is most needed and may also benefit from the higher 
rates available from impaired life annuities. Smokers too may well be able to 
obtain more generous terms for pension annuities.

There is also the question of political risk and how much faith you have in 
the government to meet pension pledges. The recent u-turn on residential 
property into self invested personal pensions (Sipps) just announced by the 
chancellor is the latest example of the way in which governments can change 
their minds for political and economic reasons. The fact is that if too many 
people do contract back into the second state scheme there is an increasing 
likelihood that the government simply won't be able to afford the promised 
benefits. This long-term threat could well lead to S2P being scrapped in future.

A recent report by the Association of Independent Financial Advisers (Aifa) 
admitted that contracting out is a "complex issue", which is very dependent on 
individual circumstances. In the main, however, there is a strong case for 
contracting in, especially amongst older people - mid forties upwards.

Younger people, faced with a rising minimum state pension age, and the 
prospect of greater long-term growth from investing in shares, may prefer the 
greater flexibility of contracting out, especially if they do not trust future 
governments not to change the rules once again. The Association of British 
Insurers (ABI) has produced a very useful factsheet summarising the pros and 
cons in an impartial way. It is available on itswebsite <http://www.abi.org.uk>.
 