
Born: Noon, 16 May 2005 
Died: 23 May 2005
Place of birth: At home, Rumbek, south Sudan 
Birth weight: 3kg 
Mother: Akol Mading, 24 
Father: Kuang Nguangning, deceased

There was gunfire on the day Sijjin Kuang was born. But it was not a bullet 
that killed him. He was another victim of a cocktail of diseases that infest 
one of Africa's least developed corners.

The guns that accompanied his birth were firing in celebration. In south 
Sudan, 16 May is the day people commemorate the outbreak of civil war between 
the Arab-dominated government in the north and black Christian rebels in the 
south, a war which has endured for 21 years. This is a country where many 
children have been born to the sound of bullets.

Sijjin was born in his mother's mud hut with a thatched grass roof on the 
outskirts of Rumbek, a town of 50,000 people which is the de facto capital of 
the rebelheld south. Only two days earlier his mother had left prison; hence 
his name - Sijjin means prison. His father was killed by a spear-thrust to the 
chest long before Sijjin's birth.

The baby's umbilical cord was cut with a dirty razor blade, which resulted in 
tetanus. He was not swaddled properly and caught an infection of the airways. 
To make matters worse, he was bitten by mosquitoes on the day he was born, and 
is thought to have caught malaria. One in four children in south Sudan dies 
before the age of five, mainly from preventable or easily treated diseases, 
Unicef says.

When the Guardian found mother and baby at a clinic in Rumbek, Sijjin was 
being treated with penicillin for his respiratory tract infection, receiving 
quinine on a glucose drip for suspected malaria and being given paracetamol for 
a fever.

His mother, Akol Mading, 24, a slender, bare-breasted girl with an ivory 
bracelet on her left wrist and a checked cloth around her waist, cradled him 
gently.

She told how she had disobeyed her parents to be with the man she loved, 
Sijjin's father. In south Sudan, girls are given in marriage in exchange for 
cattle. Human life depends on cows here; their milk is essential for fattening 
children and their meat is a rare treat on feast days.

"My parents refused to take me to school," Akol said, "because they wanted to 
give me to a man to bring cows. People say that if you take your daughter to 
school, she's not going to bring cows."

Few boys in south Sudan are sent to school, and even fewer girls. There are 
1.6 million children of school age, but only 2,000 boys and 500 girls complete 
primary school each year.

Akol refused to be exchanged for cows. Instead, she eloped with a man she met 
at a "cattle camp" - a bivouac made in the bush near an area of good pasture.

"My brothers and my father were very annoyed that I allowed myself to be 
impregnated by this man, who couldn't give a good number of cows," Akol said.

Akol, and her boyfriend, Kuang Nguangning, met in secret. They had two 
children together, a nine-year-old son and a three-year-old daughter, before 
she became pregnant with Sijjin. Then he was discovered by her family. Her 
brothers forced him to pay a dowry. He offered 25 cows for Akol, and handed 
over 15.

Unmarried women who get pregnant are frequently jailed in south Sudan. "I was 
put in prison when I was one month pregnant," Akol said. "I was released only 
two days before I delivered." Meanwhile, Kuang was murdered by one of Akol's 
brothers for failing to pay the remaining cows.

Sijjin was unaware of the violence surrounding his birth. On the evening of 23 
May he died. Staff at the clinic said he had been recovering from his 
illnesses, but the family had failed to alert them when he developed a high 
fever, which triggered a heart attack.

Sijjin was buried the night he died. The next morning, Akol sat with her 
mother, Adit Awur, in her late husband's family compound.

Conical thatch-roofed huts flanked the dusty clearing in Rumbek. A washing 
line hung between a mango sapling and a wooden pole. Inside the huts, there 
were blackened cooking pans, clothes hanging up and plastic bottles of sugar 
and flour.

There was no wailing, no open sign of grief. The deaths of small children are 
common here. "God has called the child back," said Akol's mother, who lost four 
of her eight children in infancy.

Akol sat quietly under a mango tree. Her baby lay buried under a small earth 
mound, covered by the goatskin he was wrapped in when he died.

The civil war appears finally to be over, with a peace deal signed in January. 
But the decades of fighting have left the south desperately under-developed; 
there are no tarmac roads, no power grid, few schools or hospitals. It is one 
of the toughest places in the world to be a child.

Children have been drafted to fight, and abducted as slaves. They suffer 
malnutrition and diarrhoea which saps their ability to fight a host of tropical 
diseases. Like Sijjin, far too many of them die from ailments that could easily 
be prevented.

Factfile:

 Sudan 

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 64

Population on under $2 a day: n/a

Debt per capita: $510

Life expectancy: 55.6 %

% children in education (F/M): 34/39
 