
The Simpsons’ character Waylon Smithers Jr has come out as gay after 27 years 
in the closet, thanks to the son of one of the show’s writers.

Rob LaZebnik, who is also a co-executive producer on the long-running animated 
series, has a 21-year-old son named Johnny, who is gay. “I thought ‘What better 
way to tell my son I love him than to write a cartoon about it?’” the 
53-year-old told the New York Post.

Johnny added: “The revelation that my father loves me is not much of a 
revelation, thankfully. He’s unbelievably accepting.” He went on to reveal that 
his father asks him for advice on gay issues. “He once sent me an email, and 
the header was just ‘How does Grindr work?”’

Gay social network dating app Grindr has made its way into the episode, which 
is titled The Burns Cage.

Broadcast on 3 April in the US, the storyline sees Homer Simpson on a mission 
to find Smithers a boyfriend. Mr Burns, Smithers’ long-time object of 
affection, leaves his underling devastated by not showing any interest.

Star Trek actor George Takei, who is openly gay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/04/glaad-awards-orange-new-black-george-takei>
, also makes a guest appearance as himself.

Smithers, voiced by the comedian Harry Shearer, resists Homer’s matchmaking 
efforts at first. “Oh, Mr Smithers. Come in, come in, come in,” Homer says at a 
gathering.

“Can I get you a Tom Collins?” he asks, pushing forward a young man instead of 
the gin-based cocktail. “Hmm, I see what’s going on here,” Smithers replies. 
“Fix up your boss so he won’t be so hard on you. Well, nice try.”

US site the AV Club was one of numerous outlets to approve of the episode. 
“The Simpsons handles Smithers’ coming out with surprising subtlety,” it said.

Although Smithers has hinted at his sexuality in past episodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/28/smithers-mr-burns-assistant-simpsons-gay>
, this is the first time the nuclear plant workers have openly talked about it.

The Burns Cage will be broadcast in the UK on Sky 1 soon.
 