
The sculptor Sir Anthony Caro <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro>, 
regarded as one of the leading artists of his generation and represented in 
museum collections all over the world, has died of a sudden heart attack at the 
age of 89.

Major retrospectives of his sculpture in recent years – which almost 
invariably also featured brand new work – have seen his reputation steadily 
grow; anexhibition of his work is currently on display at the Correr Museum in 
Venice 
<http://correr.visitmuve.it/en/mostre-en/mostre-in-corso-en/caro-at-correr/2013/05/9648/anthony-caro/>
.

Caro was described as "a man of great humility and humanity" by Sir Nicholas 
Serota, director of the Tate, which filled the main galleries of Tate Britain 
with his work in 2005 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/anthony-caro>.

Culture secretary Maria Miller tweeted her sorrow at the news, and called him 
"one of the greatest sculptors of his generation".

Charles Saumarez Smith, chief executive of the Royal Academy, where Caro was a 
senior member and regularly exhibited new work right up to this summer, said he 
would be much missed by both the academy and friends and admirers 
internationally: "Sir Anthony Caro OM CBE RA was one of the greatest sculptors 
in the second half of the twentieth century," he said.

Uniquely among British sculptors, thousands of pedestrians walk across Caro's 
work every day: he was the artist in the design team which created the 
Millennium bridge across the Thames in London, linking St Paul's Cathedral and 
Tate Modern.

Caro became instantly famous with an exhibition at the Whitechapel Gallery in 
1963 with brilliantly coloured abstract sculptures, breaking the tradition of 
displaying sculptures isolated on plinths by placing them directly on the 
floor, an innovation much copied since. His degree from Christ's College 
Cambridge was in engineering, before he went on to study sculpture at the Royal 
Academy Schools. In the 1950s, Caro worked as an assistant to another giant of 
British 20th-century sculpture, Sir Henry Moore.

Serota ranked him among the great names in the world of sculpture. "Anthony 
Caro was one of the outstanding sculptors of the past 50 years, alongside David 
Smith, Eduardo Chillida, Donald Judd and Richard Serra. In the 60s, he 
established a new language for sculpture in a series of elegant, arresting, 
abstract steel sculptures placed directly on the ground. His development of 
this vocabulary, building on the legacy of Picasso, but introducing brilliant 
colour and a refined use of shape and line, was enormously influential in 
Europe and America.

"Caro admired the sculpture of ancient cultures and Greece, and from the 80s 
onwards produced a series of large-scale abstract works that reflected a 
continuing interest in the human body, but also a growing fascination with 
architecture. Caro was a man of great humility and humanity whose abundant 
creativity, even as he approached the age of 90, was still evident in the most 
recent work shown in exhibitions in Venice and London earlier this year."

He was married to the painter Sheila Girling, and their long personal and 
working relationship was celebrated in a joint exhibition in 2007 at the Roche 
Court arts centre in Wiltshire.
 