
Sir Ben Ainslie has revealed that his drive to win the America's Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/americas-cup> with a British team for the 
first time in the trophy's 163-year history is "in a good place" and that he 
has made significant progress towards raising the $100m (£60.8m) required to 
try.

The four-times Olympic gold medallist, who endured a rollercoaster 2013 that 
encompassed the death of his close friend and fellow sailor Andrew "Bart" 
Simpson as well as a key role in masterminding one of the greatest sporting 
comebacks of all time for Team Oracle in the America's Cup, said a final 
decision would be made in the spring, once the rules had been published.

Ainslie, announcing that his JP Morgan-sponsored Ben Ainslie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie> Racing Team would compete in the 
Extreme Sailing Series in 2014 with a crew that includes the Olympic gold 
medallists Paul Goodison and Pippa Wilson, said he had made good progress on 
securing backing from private individuals.

Sir Keith Mills and Charles Dunstone, the backers of a previous failed bid to 
launch a British America's Cup team, are among those involved as well as "two 
or three" other private investors. Ainslie hopes to raise around half of the 
$100m required from private backers, with the rest from commercial sponsorship. 
"There's no fixed date for the publication of the rules but we expect some 
rough drafts in the next month or so and for that to be made public in the 
spring," he said.

Under the historic "deeds of gift", the winner chooses the next venue, type of 
boats and date, which is within three to five years of the race last being held.

"So long as that's realistic, and there's no nasty surprises in there, then 
we'll push ahead. We expect the budget to be somewhere in the region of $100m, 
we're realistic about that."

He said he was also "starting to pull the right sailors and designers 
together" and that the ExtremeSailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> series of "short, sharp" races 
around the world would help develop his thoughts about the right alchemy of 
skills and personalities required.

But Ainslie said a British bid for the 35th America's Cup, likely to take 
place in San Francisco in 2017, would have been impossible without the boost in 
profile afforded the sport by his part in Team Oracle's dramatic 8-7 victory 
last year.

"Realistically, we wouldn't be able to get to where we are now – we still have 
a way to go but we've had a huge amount of support – if the Cup hadn't been the 
success it was," he told the Guardian, recalling how he had "no idea" in the US 
how keenly the race was being followed back home.

Ainslie, a keen Formula One fan, said he was hopeful of persuading the Red 
Bull design expertAdrian Newey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey> 
of getting involved in some capacity. "I've had a few good chats with him. He's 
very committed to Formula One, I'm sure, but he's very passionate about sailing 
and the America's Cup and we'd love him to be involved in any way he wanted to 
be," said Ainslie.

"I'm certainly not sitting here trying to lure him away from Christian Horner, 
who I also have a huge amount of respect for. If we could get Adrian involved 
in any way that would be amazing for us but we also understand and appreciate 
his ties to Formula One."

More so than his five Olympics, Ainslie said the America's Cup had captured 
the imagination of the watching public and boosted the profile of the sport.

"The best thing in the end was the following we won for the America's Cup. 
People were coming up to me in the street and saying they had never watched 
sailing before but now there were hooked."

But his round of appearances on the circuit of end-of-year sports awards was 
bittersweet, given that his memories of the year were dominated by the memory 
of Simpson. "It was very hard. Even now. It was a sad, terrible moment for all 
of us and one that marked the year. We try and move on and do the best we can 
in his memory."

To that end, a proposed mass sailing event called Bart's Bash in aid of the 
foundation set up in Simpson's memory was announced at the tail end of 2013 and 
has now become a global event following an outpouring of interest. "It's really 
taken off. A couple of his close mates and his sister Amanda came up with this 
idea of getting clubs around the world to sail in memory of Bart and in aid of 
the foundation. So far, we've had a huge response to it. It shows how much 
support there was and is for Bart."
 