
Sir Denis Mahon, who has died aged 100, was one of the most distinguished art 
historians and collectors of the 20th century, and a determined campaigner on 
behalf of museums into his 90s. His collection of Italian baroque paintings, 
including masterpieces byGuercino 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/guercino>, Guido Reni 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/guido-reni> and Luca Giordano 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/Luca-Giordano>, has been deposited in
British institutions 
<http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/written_answers/2000/feb/29/sir-denis-mahons-paintings>
, including the National Gallery in London, the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, the 
Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge and the National Gallery of Scotland in 
Edinburgh.

Twice a trustee of the National Gallery (1957-64, 1966-73), he was 
instrumental in pushing through several important acquisitions, includingReni's 
Adoration of the Shepherds 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/guido-reni-the-adoration-of-the-shepherds>
, still the largest painting in the gallery, and, in 1970 (with the 
much-appreciated support of the sculptor Henry Moore, a fellow trustee), 
Caravaggio'sSalome Receives the Head of St John the Baptist 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/michelangelo-merisi-da-caravaggio-salome-receives-the-head-of-saint-john-the-baptist>
, a very moving late work by the artist. He was a zealous guardian of the 
public interest, actively opposing the imposition of charges for visitors to 
museums and lobbying for legislation to prevent the National Gallery from 
selling any of its pictures.

Together with the National Art Collections Fund (now the Art Fund 
<http://www.artfund.org/>) and others, he pressed for the conversion of the 
Land Fund – set up in 1946 as a memorial to those who had given their lives for 
their country and which had then been conveniently forgotten, as he put it, by 
the Treasury – into the National Heritage Memorial Fund, with independent 
trustees. His collection was always a very effective weapon in these campaigns, 
and he several times threatened to dispose of it abroad if the government of 
the day, Labour or Conservative, failed to live up to its responsiblities 
in defence of museums and heritage.

His natural attitude towards ministers and bureaucrats was one of suspicion, 
and theirs towards him was one of respectful fear combined with intense 
exasperation. He did, however, have a good working relationship with several 
arts ministers, including the Conservative Grey Gowrie (1983-85) and the Labour 
culture secretary Chris Smith (1997-2001).

Even after making public the details of his decision in 1999 to bequeath his 
pictures to the national collections fund, with the instruction that they be 
deposited in various British galleries and museums, he still threatened to 
change his arrangements if the government refused to change the rule whereby 
the non-charging national museums – including the British Museum,National 
Gallery <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-gallery> and 
National Portrait Gallery – could not reclaim VAT, whereas the charging museums 
– the Victoria and Albert, Natural History and Science Museums – could. In 2001 
the government agreed to remove the anomaly, a gesture that gave Mahon 
real pleasure.

Born in London, he was the the son of John FitzGerald Mahon, a member of the 
family that had prospered from the Guinness Mahon merchant bank, and the 
grandson, through his mother, Lady Alice Evelyn Browne, of the fifth Marquess 
of Sligo. On visits with me to Kenwood House, on Hampstead Heath, north London, 
he would point out with evident satisfaction that thePortrait of Countess Howe 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/41384443@N04/4069878372/>, one of Thomas 
Gainsborough's finest paintings, showed his great-great-great-grandmother.

Educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, where he read history, Mahon 
developed a great enthusiasm for opera. A career in the family business held 
little attraction for him, and he soon decided to devote himself wholly, and to 
the exclusion of the pleasures of opera, to studying the history of art. 
Kenneth Clark, then at the Ashmolean, was an influential figure in his 
formative years and recommended him to Nikolaus Pevsner, the German émigré art 
historian, who was then teaching at the fledgling Courtauld Institute of Art in 
London.

Best known today for his writings on the architectural history of Britain, 
Pevsner had early been interested in Italian baroque art, and suggested to 
Mahon that he study the work of Guercino – the little squinter – the nickname 
of Giovanni Francesco Barbieri, a neglected Bolognese painter of the 17th 
century. Guercino was an ideal subject because his life is well documented, and 
he was remarkably well represented in British collections. The largestgroup of 
drawings by him is at Windsor Castle, in the Royal Collection 
<http://www.royalcollection.org.uk/egallery/maker.asp?maker=12062>, which Mahon 
was to catalogue, together with Nicholas Turner, in 1989.

In his 20s, Mahon travelled extensively to study the works in museums and 
private collections of the Bolognese painters: the Carraccis – the brothers 
Annibale and Agostino, and their cousin Ludovico, who were jointly responsible 
for a revival of Italian painting at the end of the 16th century – Reni and, of 
course, Guercino, who remained his principal interest throughout his life.

Together with the Viennese expert Otto Kurz, another member of the diaspora of 
Jewish art historians who had left Germany and Austria in the 1930s, he visited 
Stalinist Russia, with a trunk of full of antiquarian books, including the 
biographies of artists written in the 17th century by Gian Pietro Bellori and 
Carlo Cesare Malvasia. The customs officials demanded that the English 
newsprint that had been used to wrap up the books be removed and handed in to 
the authorities, and informed them that they could claim it back when they left.

Mahon's studies were intimately bound up with the formation of his own 
collection of paintings and drawings. In 1934 he bought his first picture by 
Guercino, the largeJacob Blessing the Sons of Joseph 
<http://onlinecollection.nationalgallery.ie/view/objects/asitem/173/157/sortNumber-asc;jsessionid=C8C6E0DA6ACEC052498E4705AB270B7E?t:state:flow=872d1aef-dcae-460c-b6e0-4548d7a8b4dd>
, now in the National Gallery of Ireland. Two years later, he bought for £200 
Guercino'sElijah Fed By Ravens <http:>, another early work, from the Barberini 
collection in Rome. At this time he was serving as honorary attache – an 
informal, unpaid curator – at the National Gallery, then under the directorship 
of Clark, and he offered to sell the painting at cost price to the gallery. 
Clark thought very highly of the painting, but felt that it would be impossible 
to persuade the trustees of the merits of buying an Italian baroque painting.

That gave Mahon the idea of forming a collection, with a view to holding them 
until such time as the national collections would be interested in having them. 
It is difficult to appreciate now how despised Italianseicento – 17th-century – 
pictures were in Britain in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. This 
disdain was partly due to the influential views of John Ruskin, who detested 
the Carraccis, referring to them as "scum of Titian", and the overwhelming 
preference among collectors and museum curators for the "Italian primitives" of 
the 13th to 15th centuries.

Mahon, unaffected either by the prevailing view or by religious prejudice, 
acquired – for fairly small sums – paintings of intensely Catholic subject 
matter by the then unfashionable painters Domenichino, Andrea Sacchi and Ciro 
Ferri. In 1945 he encounteredReni's The Rape of Europa 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/guido-reni-the-rape-of-europa>, a 
late masterpiece by the painter commissioned by the king of Poland. At the 
auction he had found himself bidding against the frame dealer Arnold Wiggins, 
who was only interested in the beautifulrégence – early 18th-century – 
French-carved gilt frame that was on the picture. Both painting and frame are 
now in the National Gallery.

In 1947 Mahon published his Studies in Seicento Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> and Theory, which remains a 
fundamental text on 17th-century Italian art. It contains a series of closely 
argued essays, analysing, among other things, Guercino's change of style over 
the course of the 1620s, the significance of the theoretical writings of 
Giovanni Battista Agucchi, and a devastatingly thorough refutation of the label 
"eclectic", which had been used to describe the Carraccis since the 18th 
century. The book was very significant in winning over the institutions of art 
history in Britain to the acceptance of Italian 17th-century painting as a 
major and respectable school of art.

In the 1950s and 60s Mahon turned his attention to Caravaggio, writing some 
very important articles and identifying pictures previously thought lost, 
including theYoung St John the Baptist 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/italiangerry/253393397/>, which he saw hanging in 
the office of the mayor of Rome, where it was considered an old copy. It is now 
one of the masterpieces of the city's Capitoline Gallery. Roberto Longhi, the 
leading Italian figure in the study of Caravaggio in the 20th century, was 
clearly irritated by Mahon's incursions into what he considered his territory, 
but had to recognise that Mahon's observations were usually right.

In the 1960s some of Mahon's finest writings were on the French classicist 
painterNicolas Poussin 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/nicolas-poussin>, and there he often 
found himself at odds with Anthony Blunt, surveyor of the Queen's pictures, 
director of the Courtauld Institute and the principal authority on the artist. 
Mahon was critical of Blunt's connoisseurship and his confused reconstruction 
of the chronology of Poussin's oeuvre. Once again, Mahon's views have generally 
proved to be right, and his Plea for Poussin As a Painter (1965), an appeal to 
interpret the artist less as apeintre-philosophe and more as a pure painter, 
has been widely heeded.

In 1964 he bought at Sotheby's an early work by Poussin, Rebekah Quenching the 
Thirst of Eliezer at the Well, which in the sale catalogue had been 
misattributed to the Roman painter Pietro Testa. Astonishingly, in 1995 – by 
which time Mahon had long stopped collecting – the story was repeated when he 
identified, again at Sotheby's, Poussin'sThe Sack of Jerusalem 
<http://www.imj.org.il/imagine/collections/item.asp?itemNum=199789>, also 
misattributed to Testa. The painting now has pride of place in the Israel 
Museum.

With Cesare Gnudi, the soprintendente of Bologna's art institutions, he worked 
on a series of groundbreaking exhibitions in the 1950s and 60s: the Mostra 
(exhibition) dei Carracci, the Ideale Classico del Seicento in Italia, and, in 
1968, Guercino. Mahon was always a generous lender to exhibitions himself, and 
in 1960 much of his collection was shown at the vast Royal Academy exhibition 
Italian Art and Britain. In 1997 his entire collection of nearly 80 paintings 
was shown at the National Gallery, together with a selection of his drawings by 
Guercino that he had deposited years earlier in theAshmolean Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ashmolean-museum>, and two paintings by 
Annibale Carracci and Guercino . After this, the collection never returned to 
his home in Cadogan Square, Knightsbridge, central London, where he lived with 
his Spanish housekeeper and her family, since he feared that all the publicity 
it had received put it at risk from thieves.

Though he was never formally a teacher, he taught a great deal to many 
academics, university students, museum professionals and dealers through 
conversation, in exhibitions and in front of pictures. Many visitors to the 
great Poussin retrospective at the Royal Academy, London, in 1994-95 will have 
noticed an elderly gentleman in a slightly baggy pinstripe suit holding a stick 
that he would wave perilously close to the pictures, explaining the intricacies 
of Poussin's early development, or the dating of the late landscapes to anyone 
who might be interested. He spoke about painting in a brilliant and 
illuminating way, and his ability to sympathise with the aims of the artists he 
most loved meant that he spoke of Poussin, Guercino, and Annibale Carracci as 
though they were people he knew.

He celebrated his 100th birthday at the National Gallery last year, in the 
Italian baroque gallery that he had played such an important role in shaping, 
in the company of many friends and admirers. He was knighted in 1986, and 
appointed Companion of Honour in 2003.

• John Denis Mahon, art historian, collector and philanthropist, born 8 
November 1910; died 24 April 2011
 