
My friend, Nicholas Fenn, who has died aged 80, was an outstanding member of 
his generation of the diplomatic service, with postings all over the world.

He was born in London, son of the Rev Eric Fenn, Presbyterian theologian, 
college principal and deputy head of BBC religious broadcasting, and his wife, 
Kathleen (nee Harrison). He attended Downs preparatory school, Malvern, and 
Kingswood school, Bath. Nick did his national service as a pilot in the RAF, 
then went to Peterhouse, Cambridge, graduating with a first in history.

Joining the diplomatic service straight from university, he and his new wife, 
Susan (nee Russell), were set to learn Burmese and spend four colourful years 
in what was then a democracy rent by 21 different uprisings. There followed 
four even more colourful years in London as personal secretary to four foreign 
secretaries in the 1960s, including George Brown. During the next 11 years he 
worked in Algiers, the United Nations in New York, London and China.

Nick came to public attention as spokesman for the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office during the Lancaster House talks that led to the change from Southern 
Rhodesia to Zimbabwe. When, in 1982, he was offered the choice of several 
ambassadorships, he chose to return to Burma, by then a brutal military 
dictatorship. He and Susan managed to cultivate what became a long friendship 
withAung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>, 
leader of the opposition.

In 1986 they moved to Dublin, where in 1976 the previous ambassador, Sir 
Christopher Ewart-Biggs, had been blown up by the IRA. Despite being surrounded 
by rigorous security both in Ireland and the UK, the couple retained their good 
humour and hospitable bonhomie. In 1991 Nick was knighted and sent to be high 
commissioner in India until his retirement in 1996.

Following his retirement, he was director of the Marie Curie Cancer charity 
for five years. Nick and Susan never lost touch withMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>, visiting the country and raising 
money at home for charities there.

He could be described as a Christian liberal, and a shrewd idealist with a 
gift for seeing what would work and what would not. He and Susan were live 
wires in their home community of Marden in Kent.

He is survived by Susan, by their children, Robert, Charles and Julia, and by 
their 10 grandchildren.
 