
Sir Peter Fry, who has died aged 83, was a rightwing, populist Conservative MP 
for Wellingborough between 1969 and 1997 who often puzzled party whips with his 
unpredictable behaviour in the voting lobbies.

Although a union-basher who wanted to use troops against striking miners, he 
could be socially sensitive. He fought against payments for dental and eye 
tests imposed byMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
’s government, and against its cuts in housing benefit. He also resisted VAT on 
children’s shoes and in 1986 was one of two Conservative MPs who voted with 
Labour against curbs on mortgage assistance to the newly unemployed.

He took an untypically Conservative position on the council tax, which he 
thought should be based on three-person occupancy and should have wholly 
separate bands for “the very wealthy”. And he was also a campaigner for 
restrictions on laboratory testing on animals.

However, Fry was far more predictably Tory on many other matters, blaming 
Labour for the “permissiveness” of its 1964-70 reign which, he claimed, had 
encouraged drug-taking and homosexuality. He refused to back the lowering of 
the age of homosexual consent below 21 and favoured the restoration of capital 
punishment.

He was also a long-time and fervent Eurosceptic who believed that a federal 
Europe would enable Germany to have “a finger on the nuclear trigger”.

Born in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, he was the son of Edith and Harry, who 
had a clothing business. After attending the Royal grammar school, High 
Wycombe, he studied history at Worcester College, Oxford, and then worked as a 
management trainee at the packaging company Tillotsons in Liverpool, where he 
met his first wife, Edna (nee Roberts). They returned to High Wycombe, where he 
worked for five years as an inspector with the insurance company Northern 
Assurance and later set up his own firm, Peter Fry (Insurance).

In High Wycombe he indulged his twin enthusiasms of rugby and Tory politics. A 
burly, jowly man, he became captain of Old Wycombiensians and often played 
rugby for the county. Having previously been in the Wycombe YoungConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> and the Oxford University 
Conservative Association, he again became active in the Wycombe party and by 
1961 was a Buckinghamshire county councillor. By fighting two hopeless 
parliamentary seats, North Nottingham in 1964 and Willesden East in 1966, he 
earned the right to contest the marginal Wellingborough constituency in the 
1969 byelection caused by the death of its Labour MP Howard Howarth. Fry won it 
by 6,000 votes, benefiting from the abstention of trade unionists and Labour 
activists alienated by the union curbs outlined in Barbara Castle’s In Place of 
Strife white paper.

In 1973, under Edward Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
, Fry was one of 39 Tory MPs who voted against entry to the European Economic 
Community. Then, in opposition after Labour’s return to office in 1974, he made 
the key mistake that prevented him from climbing up the political pole.

In May 1976 he went on holiday in Corfu when Labour was putting through the 
controversial aircraft and shipbuilding nationalisation bill. Fry had left the 
country without making sure his vote had been paired with a Labour MP, and the 
measure was passed by just a single vote. On his return he was given a 
tongue-lashing by the chief whipHumphrey Atkins 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituaries--lord-colnbrook-1357357.html>
, with a repeat performance by an even more vehement Thatcher, the party leader.

When Thatcher won the 1979 election he was allocated nothing more than a seat 
on the transport select committee. Nonetheless he enjoyed the role, serving for 
13 years on the committee and in 1992 urging the construction of light railways 
across London instead of more road-building – anticipating by 10 years Ken 
Livingstone’s 2002 endorsement of the same idea.

Ruck over former MP Peter Fry’s rugby defence | Letter from David Hinchliffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/02/ruck-over-former-mp-peter-fry-rugby-defence>
Fry’s long presence on the transport committee was not without 
controversy.Soon after reaching Westminster he had gone into partnership with 
Doug Smith, a Haringey Tory councillor, to create a public relations firm whose 
clients included more than one bus company. His most dubious performance on the 
committee was a scorching interrogation ofSir Peter Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/apr/30/guardianobituaries>, then 
chairman of British Rail; Fry only let on well into his inquisition that one of 
his clients was BR’s long-distance travel rival, National Bus. Fry once 
informed me that the money he earned from his PR clients, made up for his 
“inadequate” pay as an MP.

His stay on the transport committee was terminated in 1992 by a new rule that 
nobody could serve more than three terms, and for Fry the mid-1990s were 
dominated by the battle over the Maastricht treaty. Despite being a well known 
Eurosceptic and chairman of the anti-Maastricht European Reform Group he 
actually voted for the treaty on two occasions – after Tory whips had brought 
pressure on his constituency association. However, he did vote against the 
third reading of the treaty bill.

He was knighted in 1994 after having served 25 years as an MP. In 1997 he was 
ousted from Wellingborough by the barrister Paul Stinchcombe, who turned Fry’s 
1992 majority of 11,816 into a slim Labour margin of 187.

Thereafter Fry’s political career was distinctly more low-key, and from 2007 
to 2011 he contented himself with chairing the parish council of Cranford, the 
Northamptonshire village in which he lived.

He is survived by his second wife, Helen (nee Mitchell), and a son, Nicholas, 
and daughter, Karen, from his first marriage, which ended in divorce. 

• Peter Derek Fry, politician, born 26 May 1931; died 12 May 2015

•Andrew Roth died in 2010
 