
A sculpture described as a "monumental work by Sir Anthony Caro" and expected 
to fetch up to £150,000 at auction has been disowned by the artist, who 
described it as "mutilated" and not his real work.

Caro, one of Britain's most celebrated artists, has accused Bonhams 
auctioneers of "misrepresentation" by describing the work as his in their 
catalogue.

He claims the piece, which has traces of graffiti and has had metal legs added 
since he sold it in 1984, has been badly cared for and altered without his 
permission and to auction it as a Caro infringes his "moral right as an artist".

The artist also hit out at those selling the piece, Peterborough sculpture 
council, as he said it was sold to them on the understanding it would be kept 
as a public work for future generations.

The five-metre, rusted and varnished steel sculpture entitled Lagoon is part 
of the 20th Century BritishArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
sale on Wednesday, has had a catalogue estimate of between £100,000-£150,000.

Caro, who was awarded a lifetime achievement award in 1997, said: "It's been 
mutilated. It had legs welded on to it and it is nothing like the original. It 
stands several feel higher than the original. It is going on show on public 
exhibition as a sculpture of mine and it's not.

"I sold it to Peterborough Sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture> Trust, who I understood to 
be trustees for sculpture to keep for future generations. I didn't know they 
would use it as something to speculate with. That doesn't make me very happy."

A spokesman for Bonhams said: "The sculpture was commissioned from Sir Anthony 
by the Peterborough Sculpture Trust, which is now selling the work through 
Bonhams in order to raise funds for its other activities. The work was 
commissioned to stand on outside has legs for support. During its long period 
of exposure to the elements the sculpture has become weathered and at some time 
was unfortunately spray painted in some areas by vandals. The spray paint has 
been removed with only minor traces remaining.

"Sir Anthony contends that the legs on which the sculpture stands are not his 
work although that is not the recollection of the trust's staff who dealt with 
the installation of the piece on site many years ago. Whether Sir Anthony was 
responsible for the legs or not they have no impact on the artistic integrity 
of the piece. They are invisible when the piece is placed in the ground outside 
as originally intended."

Caro has offered to purchase the piece from the trust but terms have not been 
agreed. Bonhams said it expected the sculpture to attract considerable interest 
from collectors when it goes on sale.

The artist said he became aware of the alterations to Lagoon only after seeing 
the catalogue and denies that changes to the piece were carried out in 
consultation with him.
 