
Sir Ben Ainslie <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie>, the most 
successful sailor in Olympic history, is about to begin his greatest challenge. 
He already has one America’s Cup to his name yet this time the stakes have been 
raised, with Portsmouth poised for a weekend in the spotlight that – it is 
hoped – could see the city buoyed once again.

Ainslie will on Saturday lead his all-British team Land Rover BAR out on the 
Solent for the first time in a competitive race. The aim, to secure a place at 
the 2017 America’s Cup in Bermuda. Win that and it will not be just a World 
Series regatta brought to England’s south coast but the revered cup itself, 
with the victor choosing the next venue.

This weekend Ainslie’s crew will race against five others during the first leg 
of a series in which points are earned for a final qualification event, before 
the two-team America’s Cup final itself. There are further events scheduled in 
Gothenburg and Bermuda this year, before a number of others in 2016. The 
leading challenger will have the opportunity to go head-to-head with Oracle 
Team USA, whom Ainslie inspired to a breathtakingvictory in 2013 over Team New 
Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/27/memorable-moments-2013-ben-ainslie>
.

If that was a dramatic turnaround in San Francisco, the prospect of a first 
British triumph in this old competition – founded in 1851 – excites Ainslie 
even more.

“I compete to win,” he says on the eve of the series curtain-raiser. “I’ve 
never made any bones about that, I’m not interested in coming second. I know 
the team behind me are only interested in winning as well. That’s what we’re 
working incredibly hard for. I think we could bring the America’s Cup back here 
and host it. I’ve got a vision of the harbour entrance being the finish line, 
with a southwesterly breeze like we’ve got today and two boats screaming 
through that finish line. It would be absolutely amazing and one of the biggest 
sporting events this country has ever hosted.”
Portsmouth graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/07/americas_cup_graphic/giv-300806I9r1C1cWBz7/>
These are bold ambitions given that a sail has yet to be officially hoisted. 
However, history shows if Ainslie sets his mind on something, he usually 
achieves it. The 38-year-old has won gold at every Olympics since 2000; without 
him Oracle would not have turned around their 8-1 deficit to defeat New Zealand 
two years ago.

What increases the pressure this time, though, is the expectations currently 
abound in Portsmouth, a city whose shipbuilding industry has declined rapidly 
in recent times, notably when the defence company BAE pulled out of the area. 
With the eyes of the sailing world now upon it, optimism has returned and a 
potential economic windfall is forecast.

The America’s Cup dominates talk here. The News, the local paper, provided 14 
pages of coverage on Thursday including a front-page headline that read: 
“Today’s the Day.” Spectators enjoyed the sunshine on Southsea Common, which is 
filled with food and entertainment stalls, while 150,000-200,000 people are 
expected to watch six boats do battle on the water.

All six skippers have tested the course in recent days and praised the Solent 
setup as a potentially exciting stage. In a sport where technology and marginal 
gains count for so much, getting the upper hand early will be paramount.

Such is the desire for technological superiority that Ainslie has turned to 
Formula One for inspiration. Adrian Newey, the esteemed Red Bull engineer, has 
been heavily involved in the project while Martin Whitmarsh – the former 
McLaren chief – was recently appointed as Land Rover BAR’s chief executive.

The similarities between the America’s Cup and F1 are clear. Given that the 
45ft catamarans will be flying along the water at speeds of more than 40mph, 
and that the AC45 boats use hydrofoils to lift the hull off the water, 
precision engineering is crucial. All crews will sail in AC45s, although when 
2017 comes longer and wider boats are expected to be 25%-30% faster.

Bringing this event to Portsmouth, where another World Series regatta will be 
held next summer, has been a long-term project, the brainchild of influential 
individuals such as Sir Keith Mills – deputy chairman of the London Organising 
Committee of the 2012 Olympics – and private investors including Sir Charles 
Dunstone, the cofounder of Carphone Warehouse. Such investors were able to 
underwrite the initial funds for a campaign through to 2017 that will cost 
around £80m, before corporate partners such as Land Rover came to the table.

That said, Ainslie’s project has not been without help. The government 
committed £7.5m of taxpayer money in July last year to assist the development 
of the new team headquarters at Camber Docks, which became fully operational in 
June. The city of Portsmouth also dipped into its pocket, providing £1.2m to 
help the process by relocating existing businesses on the Camber.

It is certainly an impressive site, standing out among the numerous old 
portside buildings. Portsmouth council owns the freehold and Land Rover BAR 
holds a 25-year lease, occupying the site rent-free for 10 years before paying 
£110,000 per annum. “The calculated judgment that we made was based on the 
impact to the city in the long-term,” said Donna Jones, the Tory leader of 
Portsmouth council. “If you look at the impact in previous host-nation cities 
of the America’s Cup like Valencia and Auckland, the cities completely 
transform and regenerate.

“This is what the gamble has been about. We’ve given them that land for 
nothing and put our public money into it on the basis that we’ll get an asset 
in the long run and have a unique and fantastic opportunity to host the racing 
here and get the windfall of people coming to Portsmouth and promoting the 
city.”

Whitmarsh added: “I think it’s a fantastic investment. We anticipate around 
40,000 schoolchildren are going to be visiting this facility every year where 
we can inspire them in sports sailing in particular but in school subjects such 
as science, technology and maths. We’re going to be employing over 100 people 
here.”

Sir Ben Ainslie believes his team can be first British crew to win America’s 
Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/23/ben-ainslie-americas-cup-and-land-rover->
Jones expects the local economy to receive a £2m boost from this week alone 
and, in the long run, that 2,000-3,000 jobs will be created, specifically in 
the tourism and hotel industries. The big gamble, though, is whether spectators 
will take to sailing and that their interest remains beyond this weekend. The 
golden goose for Portsmouth is potentially hosting an America’s Cup in 2021. No 
pressure, then, for Ainslie and his men, who will vie against Oracle and Team 
New Zealand as well as crews from Sweden, France and Japan.

“It’s inevitable that there’s a huge amount of expectation, people want us to 
do well and it’s fantastic to have this amount of support,” said Ainslie. “As a 
team we feel the responsibility. We’ve got a fantastic opportunity and a 
responsibility to go out and do the job. We’re trying to build this team up for 
the long term, we don’t want to be a one-hit wonder. We’re trying to build a 
sustainable team and business for the future.”
 