
That Sir Adrian Cadbury’s 1992 report on corporate governance is still 
recognised around the world as the starting point on how companies should be 
managed is no surprise. It bore his hallmarks – clarity of analysis, attention 
to detail, moral certainty and an expectation that people will behave well if 
properly encouraged – which marked out an exceptional business career which 
turned a family chocolate business into a worldwide empire.

Cadbury, who has died aged 86, kept close to his roots, fostering Midlands 
industry and commerce, promoting local charities in the family’s Quaker 
tradition and, as a long-serving chancellor, helping build the newAston 
University <http://www.aston.ac.uk> into a rival of its older neighbour in 
Birmingham.

He was the grandson of George Cadbury, who had built the factory and model 
dwellings of Bournville, and second son of Joyce (nee Mathews) and Laurence 
Cadbury. His father was chairman both of the chocolate business and the News 
Chronicle, which Cadbury’s owned, as well as a director of theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>. The family 
business was packed with his relations. Adrian had the classic establishment 
upbringing: Eton, national service in the Coldstream Guards, and King’s 
College, Cambridge, where he read economics and won a rowing blue. It took him 
to the 1952 Helsinki Olympics where the Cambridge Eight represented Britain and 
came fourth. “The greatest thing that ever happened to me,” he said.

Then he joined the family firm. Though he had been initiated as a teenager, 
working in the postroom in his holidays, family plans had envisaged him more 
likely to find his niche in publishing. However, the death of his older brother 
in an accident now made him first choice. He briefly considered, and rejected, 
an offer to become a solicitor. His first 18 months were spent in different 
departments, even handpainting the chocolate boxes. It taught him the 
importance of teamwork. “You listen, learn, get to know and work together. It 
is one of the biggest lessons.”

A succession of posts followed before, inevitably, the board. Members of the 
Cadbury family, he believed, should always have the opportunity to join the 
firm; progress was then according to their ability. He was chosen as chairman 
in 1965 ahead of longer serving family members when it was still unthinkable 
that the job would go to anyone but aCadbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cadburyschweppes>.

He moved decisively. An early decision to bring in the consultancy firm 
McKinsey’s created shockwaves inside and outside the company. His five-man 
executive committee had a 3-2 non-Cadbury majority, and he relied heavily on 
non-family members, and saw they were promoted to the board earlier in their 
careers, rather than as a reward for long and faithful service. Initially he 
still believed in the magic of the family name in human resources and sales, 
though insisting that when two equal candidates presented themselves, the 
non-Cadbury got preference. He would remain absorbed by the working of family 
businesses throughout his life, pointing out that they represented the majority 
of British businesses.

The big change came in 1969. The firm was mulling ways of breaking into the 
American market and he was approached , about a merger byLord Watkinson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary--viscount-watkinson-1526794.html>
, of Schweppes, the soft-drinks firm which already had US operations. The match 
seemed tailor-made. Cadbury became managing director and then chairman with the 
difficult job of making the integration work. Later, Cadbury would observe 
that, of the big mergers at the time, Cadbury Schweppes was the only one to 
have survived largely intact for the next 40 years.

By the time he retired in 1989, a turnover of £262m in 1969 had multiplied 10 
times and profit margins had increased. But he had also seen the numbers of 
British employees halve from 35,000 to fewer than 17,000, with two-thirds of 
the staff now outside the UK.

The expansion of Cadbury Schweppes swallowed the apple-juice processors Mott’s 
in 1982, Canada Dry in 1986 and the English sweetmakers Trebor and Bassetts in 
1989, and merged UK bottling operations withCoca-Cola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola> in 1987. But it was not all 
onwards and upwards. Cadbury’s confectionery business underperformed in the US. 
In the mid-80s, the company sold its US confectionery manufacturing to its 
rival Hershey. It pruned its general foods and hygiene sector, getting rid of 
household names such as Typhoo Tea and Jeyes in 1986. There were persistent 
rumours that it was a takeover target.

But when Cadbury handed over the chairmanship to his younger brother Dominic 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/west_midlands/8493484.stm> in 1989, 
insisting on observing the same retirement age as his managers, the 
transformation from a family fiefdom into a major international player was 
recognised. By 1993 market capitalisation was eight times what it had been a 
decade before.

Cadbury was knighted in 1977. A key figure in the CBI’s attempts to make 
business more central to the political agenda in the 70s, he was a 
conscientious chairman of its economics committee admired for the way he could 
harmonise the high-calibre intellectual output of the staff with the 
preoccupations of beleaguered company chairmen. He had followed his father as a 
director of the Bank of England in 1970, and was on the board of IBM, but 
resisted repeated offers of the presidency of the CBI. From 1984 to 1995 he 
chairedProNed <http://www.proned.com.au>, which promoted the appointment of 
non-executive directors.

So it was no surprise that when a series of corporate scandals questioned 
standards of financial reporting and accountability and brought pressure for 
legislation on directors’ pay, the Stock Exchange and the Financial Reporting 
Council turned to Cadbury to chair the committee on the financial aspects of 
corporate governance. He described it as his toughest assignment. But 
“Cadbury”, as its conclusions became known, remains the first port of call for 
any study of corporate governance.

Authoritative but permissive, they reflected Cadbury’s own beliefs. By the 
time the report appeared, BCCI (the Bank of Credit and Commerce International) 
and the Maxwell empire had collapsed and Cadbury commented coolly: “Unexpected 
though this attention may have been, it reflects a climate of opinion which 
accepts that changes are needed and it presents an opportunity to raise 
standards.”

From the start of the inquiry he set himself publicly against compulsion, 
arguing that making the existing system work better could be done more quickly 
and – a typical Cadburyism – would set people’s sights higher than regulation. 
“We should try to establish a set of standards and structure that will give the 
best protection against the wayward, but there is no absolute protection. 
That’s part of life.”

Key recommendations included clear division of responsibilities at the head of 
a company so that no one individual had unfettered powers (but stopped short of 
mandatory separation of chairman and chief executive), sufficient independent 
non-executive directors of high calibre and full and clear disclosure of 
directors’ emoluments. It stated its belief that a “voluntary code coupled with 
disclosure will prove more effective than a statutory code”.

Mild as it now sounds, it met deep business distrust, with talk of a 
“draconian remedy” and even a CBI criticism that it could lead to “two-tier 
boards”. But its clearly enunciated principles became the foundation of 
subsequent discussion, reflected in a string of international awards to 
Cadbury. A decade on, inCorporate Governance and Chairmanship – a Personal View 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780199252008.do> (2002), he lamented the 
way that trust in business had continued to be eroded and set out his own 
advice on running a company.

He was recognised as a man not afraid of difficult choices. “Shelving hard 
decisions”, he said, “is the least ethical course.” The same clarity was 
applied to the family tradition of corporate social responsibility. “You should 
not feel you should do something because of pressures from outside. You should 
be absolutely clear that this will be a benefit to the company as well.” He 
refused to pull Cadbury’s out of South Africa during apartheid, insisting that 
its operations were a benefit to its employees and argued with Friends of the 
Earth on environmental grounds over Schweppes’s switch away from reusable 
bottles.

His own non-executive posts were few but remarkably long-lasting. His report 
suggested that non-executives should be appointed for specific terms with 
reappointment not automatic. But he remained a director of the Bank of England 
for 24 years and of IBM for 19. He was chancellor of Aston University from 1979 
to 2004.

After retirement, he wrote and spoke extensively on corporate governance and 
devoted much attention to Aston University, even dipping into his own pocket to 
fund student activities. He was active in managing family trusts and charitable 
activity such as theBirmingham Settlement <http://birminghamsettlement.org.uk>. 
He retained his interest in family companies and spent time collating family 
papers.

With family control past, he and Dominic were unable to prevent the 
controversialtakeover of Cadbury by the American food group Kraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/19/cadbury-board-agrees-kraft-sale>
 in 2010. But they made their feelings and the Cadbury credo plain in a letter 
to the Daily Telegraph. “A bidder can buy a business,” they wrote. “What they 
cannot acquire is legitimacy over the character, values, experience and 
traditions on which that business was founded and flourished.” The respect in 
which Cadbury continued to be held was recognised by his appointment as a 
Companion of Honour in January this year.

Cadbury’s first wife, Gillian (nee Skepper), whom he married in 1956, died in 
1992. They had two sons and a daughter. He married a family friend, Susan 
Sinclair, in 1994; she died in 2010.

• George Adrian Hayhurst Cadbury, businessman, born 15 April 1929; died 3 
September 2015
 