
Sir Ben Ainslie confirmed that the Formula One designer Adrian Newey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey> could play a key role in the 
development of his ambitious £80m America’s Cup project and said winning the 
America’s Cup with a British team would surpass his four Olympic sailing gold 
medals.

Ainslie was joined by the Duchess of Cambridge at the launch of his new team 
in Greenwich on Tuesday. They hope to win the 35th America’s Cup in 2017 and 
become the first British outfit to do so. The 37-year-old has already held 
discussions with Newey, the Red Bull designer who recently agreed a new 
contract with the organisation, and believes his input could be crucial. Newey 
resisted overtures from Ferrari to stay with Red Bull but his hands-on role 
with the F1 team may be reduced.

“I’ve had a couple of really good chats with Adrian. He’s a really lovely guy 
and the most successful designer in Formula One history. He’s keen on racing in 
the America’s Cup, it’s great for us. He clearly has a lot of commitments still 
withFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> and it really 
depends how he can fit something in and being involved in the team,” said 
Ainslie.

“It’s all about aerodynamics and hydraulics so we’ve already started 
discussions with the motorsport teams in the Formula One world.”

Asked how winning the America’s Cup with a British team would rank alongside 
his Olympic achievements, Ainslie said: “It would far and away surpass that 
because it’s such a huge challenge and the fact that we’ve never done it. It 
would be an amazing achievement.”

Ainslie played a pivotal role in last year’s America’s Cup success for Oracle 
Team USA, who were trailing Team New Zealand 8-1 before Ainslie masterminded a 
dramatic 9-8 comeback in San Francisco. Sir Keith Mills, the deputy chairman of 
the London Organising Committee of the Olympic Games, and the co-founder of the 
Carphone Warehouse, Sir Charles Dunstone, are both directors ofBen Ainslie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie> Racing. They will also provide 
funding for the team, which will be based in Portsmouth.

Mills said: “The aerodynamics of a car is not too dissimilar to a boat. We 
start by having discussions with F1 teams and companies. It will ultimately be 
a collaboration of companies and individuals that have the experience we need 
to win this thing.

“This is the last sporting challenge. Britain has never won the America’s Cup, 
ever.”
 