
The notion that a Williams sister can win just about anywhere, any time they 
put their minds to it was enhanced in the final of the Australian Open when
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> blasted her 
way to her tenth grand slam title with a crushing 6-0, 6-3 victory over 
Russia's Dinara Safina.   

At Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> last year it was 
Venus, at the US Open Serena and Venus again in the year-end finals in Qatar. 
But from the moment Serena arrived in Melbourne in a particularly jolly mood, 
she had looked the more likely sister to step forward and claim this prize, and 
so it proved.

Not that her tennis always matched the smile in the early rounds as she lost 
first sets to Victoria Azarenka and Svetlana Kuznetsova but the optimism 
remained resolute throughout and, against Safina, she just came out swinging. 
The Russian, a slender, trimmed-down version of the player who started a fine 
run of success by beating Serena in Berlin last May, began in disastrous 
fashion with three double faults in the opening game and everything slid 
downhill from there.

The harder Safina hit the ball, the harder Williams hit it back and soon, of 
course, the errors started to flow. "I was like a ball boy out there," said 
Dinara afterwards, graciously summoning a weak smile. She had wanted so much to 
emulate her brother Marat who won this title in 2005 but, in reality, there was 
never much chance of that. Once Serena finds her rhythm and locks onto the task 
in hand, there is no one in the world who can survive with her on a tennis 
court – except, perhaps, her sister.

Just for good measure, the sisters added the doubles crown to their list of 
achievements here, just as they had at Wimbledon, bringing their total doubles 
titles in grand slams to eight. The experienced pair of Daniela Hantuchova and 
Ai Sugiyama played quite well in the final but still lost 6-3, 6-3.

Serena's singles victory enabled her to reclaim the world No 1 ranking – a 
position she held briefly last year and for 57 weeks back in 2002-03.  She 
seems more determined to hold onto it now although she admitted she had 
forgotten all about the added bonus until someone in her box reminded her.

And therein lay the difference between the champion and the pretender. Safina, 
asked if nerves led to her downfall, replied: "Well, I would say so. It was the 
first time for me to play not only for grand slam but also for No 1 spot."

Serena, radiating happiness in an elegant black dress in the press conference, 
reckoned it was "definitely one of my most dominant performances, especially 
considering it was a final. I was just able to lift the level of my game and I 
think the doubles really helped me out."

The American has won the past two grand slams and is looking to repeat her 
feat of 2002-03, when she held all four titles. "The Serena Slam is something 
I'd like to do again," she said. "It would be great to win more than one, more 
than two grand slams this year, more than three. That would be awesome."

So the women's final turned out to be as brief as the second of the men's 
semi-finals had been long. Rafael Nadal's win over fellow Spaniard Fernando 
Verdasco will probably define these championships not just because, at 5hrs 
14mins, it was the longest in the tournament's history but because few of the 
experienced observers could remember a duel of such sustained brilliance from 
both sides of the net. Verdasco hit 93 winners and, in the end, lost the points 
count 192 to 193. It was stunning stuff. What it has done to Nadal's chances of 
winning here for the first time when he facesRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> today remains to be seen.

But for the intervention of the burning heat which blew like a furnace across 
Melbourne, the event might have bucked economic trends and set overall crowd 
records. As it is, attendance might end up being down on last year but the 
first Saturday crowd of 66,600 set a total day record for a grand slam that 
will take some beating – even in New York.

The introduction of Spiegelworld, an entertainment concept set out by the 
sponsors' tents, made little impact and seemed somehow superfluous in a city 
that takes its sport very seriously. Far more in keeping with the occasion was 
the arrival of Rod Laver, not simply to sit in his stadium, but to celebrate 
the 40th anniversary of his second grand slam – the yet to be repeated feat of 
winning all four major mens titles in one year which Laver shares with Don 
Budge.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia put on a splendid 
lunch for Laver yesterday and rustled up the players he beat in his four finals 
in 1969 – Andres Gimeno, of Spain, in the Australian; Ken Rosewall at Roland 
Garros, John Newcombe at Wimbledon and Tony Roche at the US Open.

Laver, revered as a player and loved as a man, was not allowed to get away 
with too much, of course, Aussie humour being what it is. When Martina 
Navratilova got up to ask the four beaten finalists what it was that made Laver 
so special, Roche looked down at the relevant draw sheets from that era and 
muttered: "Two sets to one down; two sets to love down – he got lucky." The 
game was lucky to have him.
 