
The National Audit Office has called for submissions for a value-for-money 
study on the 16–18 education sector. Sixth-form colleges ought to emerge very 
well. In the 1970s, when most sixth-form colleges came into existence, it must 
have seemed a pretty safe bet that two things would follow from their creation. 
They should prove more efficient financially, because class sizes would be 
larger. They should also produce better quality, because course choice would be 
greater and staff would be focused on the needs of a less diverse age group.

And so it has turned out to be. The disparity per student in the funding for 
identical courses in school sixth forms and sixth-form colleges has long been 
acknowledged, and the government has now announced in the white paper that it 
is determined to rectify the matter.

On the value side, the case is equally clear. Sixth-form colleges offer 
students outstanding choice. Typically, there will be 40 AS-level courses to 
choose from and the flexibility of the timetable will permit even the most 
unusual combinations of subjects. Sixth-form colleges are able to attract 
outstanding staff, and their determination to enhance the quality of provision 
has led to the co-ordination at national level of the many peer-review schemes 
that flourish regionally.

Ofsted's judgments have led to one in three sixth-form colleges gaining Beacon 
status, and Ofsted research gives the lie to the old prejudice that sixth-form 
colleges only do a great job with great students. The innocuously entitled A 
Comparison of the Effectiveness of Level 3 Provision in 25 Post-16 Providers, 
of September 2008, contains an illuminating study of all post-16 providers. The 
statistics offer comparison of value added on A-level courses by type and by 
size of FE college, sixth-form college and school sixth form.

In smaller cohorts of between 100 and 200 students, the disparity in quality 
is dramatic. Only 32% of school sixth forms achieved more value added than the 
norm, compared with 63% of sixth-form colleges and 22% of FE colleges. Even 
with larger cohort sizes, the difference was significant. With cohorts in 
excess of 600, 60% of school sixth forms achieved more value added than the 
norm, compared with 66% of sixth-form colleges and 50% of FE colleges. Value 
added, note, not just raw exam results.

Of course, whether such evidence would have any impact on government policy is 
another question. The need for financial efficiency and the government's 
commitment to driving up quality surely place sixth-form colleges in a very 
strong position. On the other hand, its reform programme is partly driven by 
the belief that power should be devolved to the lowest possible level. It is a 
reasonable assumption that decision-making will become progressively less 
evidence-based. Put that alongside the other key government principle of 
setting policy with an eye on the long term, and the future begins to look not 
quite so bright.

The secretary of state has also enhanced his powers to intervene directly if 
or where the "power-shift" doesn't work. Perhaps all will be well and the free 
schools and academies will flourish. If they do not, then the government might 
want to look closely at the success of sixth-form colleges, which, relative to 
other forms of provision, is outstanding. The government has learned many 
things by looking abroad, but sixth-form colleges show that quality can begin 
and flourish at home.

• Chris Thomson is principal of Brighton Hove & Sussex Sixth Form College
 