
Adam Boulton has had enough. The Sky News political editor, who is stepping 
down after a quarter of a century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/adam-boulton-step-down-sky-news-political-editor>
 to present a new evening show on the 24-hour news channel, says the 
Westminster beat is not what it was.

A bear of a man in bullish form, Boulton takes David Cameron and the coalition 
government to task for what he perceives to be its obsessive news management. 
It's enough to have Boulton, a vocal critic ofAlastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, pining for the days of 
New Labour. "For me covering this present generation of politicians is not as 
fun as it was in the Blair or Thatcher era," says Boulton. "I do feel there is 
more news management and less access to politicians and primary sources than 
there used to be. We do our best to get round that, but it is frustrating."

He contrasts Margaret Thatcher – "who would tell you exactly what she thought" 
– with today's "cautious pre-prepared approach to politics, and I have to say 
with this prime minister we don't even get monthly news conferences. He prefers 
to do interviews away from specialist or senior correspondents, to do them on 
breakfast sofas or out in the field."

Boulton blames a "lot of mini-Alastair Campbells who think it's their job to 
dictate, to try to limit the exposure of their particular protege". Things came 
to a head when he was about to board a train to Leeds to interview George 
Osborne only to be told it was for economics correspondents only. "This 
resulted in a row which still simmers to this day. I just think that's 
pathetic," says Boulton. "I've interviewed Cameron a few times recently," he 
adds. "But you always have this sense of someone standing there saying you only 
have three minutes or five questions. It's disputed, it should be said, by No 
10, but I think it's a fact of life."

British TV's longest serving political editor, having taken up the role at the 
launch ofSky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> in 1989 after a 
stint at TV-am, Boulton will try a different route to power with his weeknight 
news and interview show, due to launch later this year. Famous for working 
20-hour days during elections, Boulton, who turns 55 this month, says the time 
felt right to move to a full-time presenting role after 25 years, which is 
"quite a big milestone, for me and Sky".

After years going head-to-head with other 24-hour news channels, Boulton's 
main competition in his new role will beChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> News and BBC2's Newsnight. His 
audience is likely to be a fraction of them both, but confidence is not in 
short supply. "While I admire many of the people who work on those programmes, 
I would say they are somewhat pursuing their own tails at the moment and that 
there may be room for a straight news programme in the middle of the evening," 
he says. "One's noticed a lot of interchange in personnel on those two 
programmes, they seem to be having their own little debate in the corner and 
I'm not sure it's in the mainstream of where the news is."

He adds: "I love Jon Snow <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jon-snow>, he has 
been a mentor of mine, but you do sometimes wonder how many presenters they can 
cram into their [Channel 4 News] studio. I saw Jon at a summit, he was 
reporting on his own. I said, 'it's nice to see you without the muppets'. It's 
not that the individuals are muppets, it's that idea of the big figure 
surrounded by a whole load of other figures all fighting over the autocue. I 
think it's Jon's show."

The walls of Boulton's Millbank office are covered with snapshots from his 
career – a London Evening Standard front page after Gordon Brown walked out of 
a Boulton interview in 2009, a photo with Barack Obama, and a still of an 
encounter with Campbellafter their furious on-air bust-up  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gkHwU4DRA8>over the 2010 general election 
result.

"Hard things were said," remembers Boulton. "I still see him around. My view 
is, I was mistaken to lose my temper but I was right in what I was saying, 
which was the maths for Labour putting a coalition together were not there, and 
I have been proved right."

According to Campbell's diaries, Boulton was once considered in Downing Street 
as the former No 10 director of communications' successor. "It wasn't about 
being his successor," says Boulton, who married Tony Blair's former gatekeeper, 
Anji Hunter, in 2006. "I had already engaged quite publicly and critically with 
the spin operation and said I would consider a fixed-term contract on a civil 
service basis to try and re-engineer government communications with the 
political lobby. But they weren't interested. That was that."

Over his entire Sky News career, Boulton says he has met Rupert Murdoch "less 
than six times". He "resents to this day" accusations that Sky News could not 
be trusted to report the phone-hacking story because of its links to Murdoch's 
News Corporation, a 39.1% shareholder in Sky News parent, BSkyB. "It was just 
decided automatically that we were going to report that just as hard as we 
would any other story. I think we did that."

Described as a "political nutter" by Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/16/adam-boulton-interview>, Boulton 
has resisted job offers from both the BBC and ITV. Part of the reason he stayed 
at Sky, he argues, is because he has "less pressure from above" than either his 
BBC or ITV counterparts. "I'm not disparaging their work, but you only have to 
look at the structure of the BBC and the number of layers of people deciding 
political policy above [BBC political editor] Nick Robinson to work out that 
obviously there is much more of a commitment to a line to take."

Boulton has previously dubbed the BBC a "monster" and accuses it of a "public 
sector mentality" that makes it "suspicious of profit, suspicious of commerce". 
He believes the BBC should be regulated by Ofcom, in the same way as commercial 
broadcasters, and prefers subscription or funding via income tax rather than 
the licence fee, which he describes as "poor people subsidising the middle 
classes".

As well as his new show, Boulton's new brief will see him installed as Sky's 
"editor at large", overseeing key political events such as next year's party 
leader debates. Assuming they happen, that is.

"We have an odd situation where all three leaders say they are in favour but 
the Conservatives are saying we don't want to talk about the details yet," says 
Boulton, who was accused of "heckling" Nick Clegg (and later cleared of 
breaching the broadcasting code by Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/05/ofcom-sky-news-adam-boulton>) 
during the Sky News debate in 2010. "The sooner we can get an agreement in 
principle, the sooner the broadcasters can sit down and say, 'would you be 
prepared to do it a bit differently?'"

But Boulton thinks this should not extend to opening up the main leaders' 
debates to either Ukip leader Nigel Farage or SNP leader Alex Salmond. "The 
success of the debates last time round should be the basis for trust with the 
politicians," he adds. "We are not just going to try to screw them over for the 
sake of it."

 