
People don't usually travel to Skye for the architecture. An overabundance of 
natural beauty and unspoilt landscape, from the dramatic peaks of the Cuillin 
Hills to the shimmering lochs and pristine coastline, draw many tourists who 
would happily stay in a leaky caravan or a fluttering tent. But for those who 
like a bit of modern comfort, there are now some more appealing options, thanks 
to the innovative thinking of an award-winning Scottish architecture practice.

Dualchas was founded in 1996 by twin brothers Neil and Alasdair Stephen, who 
grew up in Glasgow, but whose mother is from Skye. At that time they were 
concerned with building high-quality, affordable housing that didn't mar the 
natural landscape it sat in. In 1999 they were joined by Mary Arnold-Forster, 
who "gave up building kitchen extensions in London to design houses in the 
Highlands". Together they have become known for designs that preserve the form 
of the traditional Scottish longhouse and respect the natural surroundings, 
while integrating high-quality materials and finishes with modern concepts of 
space and light.

They have built a number of year-round and holiday homes on the Isle of Skye, 
several for clients who have returned to the Highlands or Western Isles after 
decades spent on the mainland or abroad. While Dualchas never set out to build 
holiday lets, fortunately for Skye tourists several of these properties are now 
available as self-catering houses and B&Bs.

One of the firm's early projects on the island was the Longhouse, designed by 
Mary Arnold-Forster. The house is owned by Richard Goslan, a journalist based 
in Glasgow, who spends time there with his family but lets it out for about 40 
weeks a year. Goslan was a boyhood friend of the Stephens brothers and was keen 
to have a place in Skye designed by them.

"What they are doing is so much better than the standard Scottish housing," he 
enthuses. "You've got all this amazing landscape in the Highlands, and most 
houses are just pebble-dashed nightmares. But in their houses, with these 
windows, even if the weather is appalling you can just sit with a glass of wine 
and watch it change."

Located in Tokavaig on the southern Sleat peninsula, the Longhouse has many of 
the features that Dualchas has become famous for: high-ceilinged open-plan 
living spaces, quality fittings, wood floors with underfloor heating, efficient 
wood-burning fires at the centre of the house and, most importantly, lots of 
natural light pouring through floor-to-ceiling windows.

Driving in from the Skye Bridge to Broadford, I spotted my first Dualchas 
design without even looking at the address, mainly because of those huge 
windows but also because of the simple but elegant shape. It was the B&B Tigh 
an Dochais in Harrapool, run by Neil Hope and Lesley Unwin.

The house sits with one long side facing Broadford Bay so the vast windows 
overlook the open water. Lesley works locally as a GP while Neil has thrown 
himself happily into the running of the B&B, not only keeping a well-designed 
house but stocking local produce for guests.

Heading north to the Waternish peninsula, we found the Tern House and the Old 
Byre just off the road to the tiny village of Stein. Elma Sands and her husband 
bought the properties, a stone cottage and outbuilding, last year. Both had 
been renovated by Dualchas for the previous residents, who let the small house 
and ran a B&B in the main house. Though she hasn't continued with the B&B, Elma 
still lets the Old Byre as a self-catering cottage. Originally from Sutherland, 
Elma lived abroad with her family for 30 years, but they have recently returned 
to live permanently on Skye. "We had been talking to Mary about building a 
house," she explains in the glass-walled kitchen of Tern House, "but then we 
passed by this place and the 'For Sale' sign was out, and we just couldn't say 
no."

The Old Byre is a very intimate little retreat. The downstairs is 70 square 
metres, including a generous shower room. But with the ample windows, 
double-height ceiling, slate floors and beautiful oak fittings, it is a little 
box of luxury. Though Elma is not convinced that anyone would want to actually 
sleep in the loft - a little mezzanine eyrie accessed by a beautiful but steep 
oak ladder - it is a wonderful place to sit and read or relax.

Our stay in Calath, a cottage overlooking Loch Harport on the western 
Minginish peninsula, was so bright and cosy, despite the wild weather, that we 
never even lit the fire. But though we were warm and dry we also felt the 
presence of the landscape through large glass doors that frame the loch, and a 
great south window looking over the Cuillins.

We did do as Richard Goslan recommends, however, and sit comfortably sipping a 
drink (ours was a Talisker from the distillery down the road) and watching the 
weather change.

The combination of rugged natural beauty, modern comforts and fine dining (not 
to mention the cost of travelling abroad) will only make Skye more popular in 
years to come, but it still has a long way to go before its roads look anything 
like the southern coast of England on a vaguely sunny day.

The famed Three Chimneys restaurant in Colbost sits demurely on a little road 
that leads to Neist Point at the western tip of the Duirinish peninsula, where 
you can take a rather exhilarating, windblown walk to the lighthouse. For years 
the restaurant has drawn a fair number of gastro-tourists to the area. But 
nowadays the dinner-bound travellers will notice a pleasant addition to the 
scene: just before Colbost, in Skinidin, is the Timber House, built for a 
couple who run an interiors shop in Edinburgh.

Like other Dualchas clients the couple wanted a remote holiday getaway that 
fitted the rural setting. It resembles a small barn, but has beautifully ageing 
larch walls and, as ever, those huge windows. From certain viewpoints the house 
appears to sit happily on its own in the open landscape.

Luckily for us, Skye is one place in the UK where that can still be achieved.

Essentials

The Longhouse (0141 637 3334; skyelonghouse.com <http://www.skyelonghouse.com>
), Tokavaig. Four double bedrooms, two bathrooms. Walking distance to a ruined 
castle. From £700 a week.

Tigh an Dochais B&B (01471 820022; skyebedbreakfast.co.uk 
<http://www.skyebedbreakfast.co.uk>), Harrapool, three double bedrooms from £40 
per person. Walking distance to the Skye Serpentarium (skyeserpentarium.org.uk).

The Old Byre at Tern House (01470 592332; ternhouse.com 
<http://www.ternhouse.com>). Tiny self-catering studio for two. Walking 
distance to the Loch Bay seafood restaurant (01470 592235;
lochbay-seafood-restaurant.co.uk <http://www.lochbay-seafood-restaurant.co.uk>) 
and the village of Stein. From £230 for three days.

Calath (07746 470742; calath.co.uk <http://www.calath.co.uk>), overlooking 
Loch Harport, sleeps six to eight. Walking distance to the Talisker distillery (
taliskerwhisky.com <http://www.taliskerwhisky.com>). From £450 a week.

The Timber House, Skinidin, near Colbost, (01456 486358; 
wildernesscottages.co.uk <http://www.wildernesscottages.co.uk>). Timber-clad 
house with two bedrooms. Walking distance to the Three Chimneys restaurant (
threechimneys.co.uk <http://www.threechimneys.co.uk>). From £400 a week.
 