
The idea was simple enough - there's a new seaplane service operating in 
Scotland, did I want to take it up to the Skye Festival and report back? 
Putting a bit of glamour back into air travel and all that jazz? (Yes Please). 
Then the phone call late Thursday to tell us that the weather is "crapping out" 
- so we end up making the trip north in a rented Ford Focus. It's the same old 
problem - if anything in Scotland is weather dependent, chances are it ain't 
going to happen at all ...

We're hoping to catch my brother's band the Injuns opening the main stage at 
the festival, but the bank holiday traffic is at a near standstill all the way 
out of Glasgow and along Loch Lomond-side. When we eventually shake it off, I 
manage to drive fast and badly enough to make my girlfriend both violently sick 
and furious. It does make you wonder whether there might be some mileage in the 
alternatives - the west coast of Scotland is riddled with long sea lochs so 
maybe a seaplane network isn't such a bizarre idea after all.

The consolation of the traffic on this occasion is that at least some of it is 
headed for the festival - a gig I'm especially nervous about because, as a 
minor backer as well as DJ this year, it's the only one I've done where I stand 
to lose my shirt if things don't pan out.

After four weird weeks of Mediterranean-type sun in April, things in Skye have 
turned distinctly moody this weekend. It's every type of weather at once. Great 
news for landscape photographers - several of whom we nearly run off the road 
at Loch Cluanie - but camping on Skye?

Thankfully there's already a good crowd in evidence as we approach the 
airstrip near Broadford, site of the festival for the last three years. (Yes, 
it's on an airstrip, not a mountain-top, but where else can you park 5,000 
cars?) The view is stunning across Broadford bay and out to Pabay - a small 
outlying island which, according to local lore, used to belong to cutlery 
bender Uri Geller. (No, it's not noticeably bent).

The organisers have taken a risk this year and booked some massive bands - 
Primal Scream, Echo and the Bunnymen - and apparently it's paid off. 
Unfortunately, my girlfriend is feeling so nauseated that she needs to lie down 
for a few minutes so we head to my folks' house and don't make it back to the 
site until 10pm, just in time to hear Kasabian take to the main stage to a huge 
roar from the crowd. It's an apt choice of band - if there's one thing people 
in Skye really like (even more than The Eagles, dammit!), it's Manc-music, a 
sound epitomised by the Leicestershire band.

Our friend Andy, brand ambassador for Jon, Mark and Robbo's whisky, has turned 
up with a few crates of the stuff, to the delight of the backstage area. It's a 
chilly night and we need a bit of help getting warmed up. We catch young 
Johnny-come-lately Calvin Harris' set to a completely packed second tent - 
thank God he's finished by the time I'm due on the main stage.

Highlight for me, though, is the Dukesbox - a band of three inexplicably 
Lycra-clad Welshmen in a large translucent box who play any song from their 
repertoire of 35 if you push a pound through a slot in the front - an idea of 
profound genius (though not particularly remunerative, surely?). The Dukes also 
turn up later on and charge around stage while I'm DJing, which is very welcome 
as it gets a little lonely up there ... the only other company I have is a 
particularly convincing stuffed dog who mans the left deck.

Miraculously, the next day the sun is shining and the vibe on site is good. 
After a spectacular sleep and restorative breakfast of venison burgers, mussels 
cooked in cream and Hoegaarden, we manage to catch the end of legendary 
singer-songwriter John Martyn's set, as well as the excellent Union of Knives. 
Best band of the festival for me, though, are the Aliens (formed out of the 
ashes of the Beta Band), who are like a psychedelic Sigue Sigue Sputnik with 
two left-handed guitarists (but in a good way).

Monday morning bright and early, we're told to ready ourselves for the second 
shot at the seaplane - they give us just 10 minutes' warning, but we're 
standing on the old pier at Armadale when the plane appears, a tiny buzzing 
speck coming from the direction of Loch Morar on the mainland. We've been 
warned not to be too optimistic - the wind's getting up again and if there are 
too many white horses on the waves, the pilot is going to turn around and head 
south without us.

The plane makes a turn overhead, and then disappears from sight before making 
a low pass, skimming along a few feet above sea level. But he's not landing and 
after a few seconds he begins to gain altitude and then he's out of sight again.

"Bugger" is the general consensus: "He's bottled it."

The five hours back to Glasgow by car, a journey I've made hundreds of times, 
suddenly seems impossibly onerous. We're just about to join the ferry queue 
when the buzzing gets louder again and the plane is splashing down in the bay. 
Cheers all round. Local speedboat operator Pete Fowler is on hand to give us a 
lift in what turns out to be an extremely overladen rubber dinghy. The sea's a 
lot choppier than it looked from the pier. "You're going to get absolutely 
soaked," he tells me, a split-second before we pitch headfirst into a massive 
wave, which breaks over the bow and covers me in icy water. More cheers all 
round. Putting the glamour back in travel.

As we approach the plane, the pilot, dressed for the office, steps elegantly 
out on to one of the floats and helps his sodden cargo into the the plane. We 
get a quick emergency briefing - "This is your lifejacket; this is the door."

There's a roar from the single propeller and a couple of bumps, and we're 
airborne. I manage to get a fuzzy photograph of my folks' house, about a mile 
north of the ferry, before we bank steeply out across the Sound of Sleat 
towards the mainland. There's a beautiful view of the small isles - Eigg, Muck, 
Rhum and Canna - to our right as we pass south of Mallaig over the Morar Sands.

This landscape is as familiar to me as the back of my hand, but not from this 
angle. When we soon lose sight of the Mallaig-Fort William road I'm already 
pretty lost. We're passing through rain clouds and the occasional hailstorm, 
over the barren hillsides of Sunart and Moidart. We're only cruising at 3,000ft 
- roughly the same height as the hills around us - for one vertiginous moment 
we seem to be heading straight for a ridge, but we pass over with a couple of 
hundred feet to spare, and then we're over Loch Linnhe and can see Ben Nevis 
and Fort William at the head of the loch, and the isle of Lismore baking in a 
patch of sun to our right.

I re-read Robert Louis Stevenson's Kidnapped last year and I eventually 
realise that we're retracing the steps of wee Davie Balfour as he tries to get 
back to Edinburgh after surviving his shipwreck off Mull - across Morvern, Loch 
Linnhe and over to Appin - land of the rebel Stewarts. Then we're over Campbell 
country (the bad guys, incidentally!) into Argyle and I'm lost again for a few 
minutes until I recognise the awkward-shaped peak of The Cobbler to our right 
and we're approaching the long neck of the northern end of Loch Lomond. I can't 
quite believe we're already there. After a couple of steep turns to lose 
altitude, we're landing into the wind, just a few yards from the road we were 
labouring up a couple of days before. We've been in the air for about 40 
minutes.

Our pilot, Darren, an affable Canadian of Viking extraction, secures the plane 
to the jetty with a few knots and offers us a lift to Helensburgh, where we can 
catch our train back to Glasgow. He's new to Scotland - struggling with the 
Glaswegian accent a little - and previously ran his own seaplane in British 
Columbia. It's as common to commute from the islands off Vancouver to the city 
by seaplane as it is by ferry, and he doesn't see any reason why the same 
shouldn't apply here.

But until people get used to the idea of taking a seaplane to work, the 
company are concentrating on tourist charters and corporate lunch trips - 
they'll pick you up from the Clyde in Glasgow and take you to any restaurant in 
Scotland - as long as it's got a convenient strip of loch nearby.

· skyemusicfestival.co.uk <http://www.skyemusicfestival.co.uk>. Loch Lomond 
Seaplanes (0870 242 1457,lochlomondseaplanes.com 
<http://www.lochlomondseaplanes.com>) start flying from Loch Lomond to Skye 
(and also Bute, Arran, Mull and Oban) from July from around £195 return.

· Note on emissions: "Broadly speaking, a car carrying one person is 
responsible for the same amount of CO2 entering the atmosphere as one person 
travelling in a plane over the same distance. And a prop plane will lead to 
less emissions than a jet plane over the same distance largely because they 
travel far more slowly. But land-based public transport will always be the 
winner when comparing emissions."
 Leo Hickman, Guardian ethical living editor.
 