
Aaron Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, 25, has 
just moved back in with his parents in Norbury, south London, after graduating 
in English literature from the University of Leicester. Not quite the profile 
you might expect of a man who, as the new president of the National Union of 
Students, is about to lead one of the fiercest political battles in a 
generation.

Porter has only months in this new age of austerity to convince Lord Browne, 
who is carrying out a major review into university financing, that the 
government should not raise the cap on student fees.

If he fails, hundreds of thousands of young people he represents now – and 
millions in the future – will face an increasingly US-style market in higher 
education. That could mean starting their working lives with debts of £50,000 
or more. "I've got a hell of a lot on my plate," he admits.

The campaigning begins in earnest tomorrow, when thousands of students and 
lecturers team up for 70 events across the country, hoping that higher 
education will be spared the worst of the cuts to be unveiled in Tuesday's 
emergency budget.

Porter might be living with his parents – a policeman who grew up in London 
and a teacher from Trinidad – but by day his job is as high-powered as they 
come. Dressed in a smart dark suit, striped shirt, red tie and shiny black 
shoes, he is due to go from this interview with theObserver to a one-on-one 
meeting with Lord Browne. From there it is on to an advisory forum with top 
figures in the field including Professor Steve Smith, president of Universities 
UK, which represents all vice-chancellors.

Porter officially becomes NUS president on 1 July, but he has already met 
Vince Cable, secretary of state for business, innovation and skills, and 
tomorrow he will sit down with David Willetts, the universities minister. In 
between the occasional dinner cooked by his mother, he is working 10 to 20 
hours a day, seven days a week. "The stakes are so high – it is imperative I 
get my point across," he says.

Success, says Porter, is "ensuring that a market in fees does not emerge". And 
failure? "The disaster would be a real market in fees coupled with cuts from 
the government... it will devastate some people's lives." He is fighting hard 
to stop universities getting their way and lifting the £3,225-a-year cap on 
fees (due to rise to £3,290 this year).

Porter is already worried about predictions that this summer 150,000 pupils 
who have the ability to go to university will never make it. Tackling that 
issue is what he sees as his key role: "It is vital – I have to stand up to 
defend what could be a lost generation of young people. And also ensure that 
education can continue to be based on ability, and not ability to pay. That is 
the real battle we are up against."

It is a battle for which the NUS has created a new strategy. One of the 
youngest unions in the country has given up shouting from the sidelines and 
decided instead to step into the fray.

"We've moved from irrelevance to the centre of the debate," he says. "By 
ensuring we have evidence-based policy and engaging in the debate that is 
happening, not in some imaginary one." Porter remembers 2004, when he was 19 
and the decision was being taken to increase fees from their original level of 
£1,000 a year. At that time the NUS stuck to a position opposing all tuition 
fees, calling instead for the reinstatement of grants.

But, he argues, the argument had already been lost and the time had come to 
move on. "There came a point when the debate was no longer 'should there be 
fees or not?', but 'how do we fund higher education?' Rather than sitting at 
the table, we were standing outside shouting. We weren't taken seriously: we 
were left out in the cold."

It was his predecessor, Wes Streeting, who fought to change the NUS from the 
inside, dropping its opposition to contributions from students. Instead, the 
organisation came up with an alternative – a graduate tax, which would see 
students face a slightly increased rate of income tax over their careers. It 
was a fight to get the union to accept it and now Porter is determined to 
maintain the policy. "There are some that think we should stick to the 
principled position of free education. But if vice-chancellors expect us to 
stand on the outside waving placards they are sorely mistaken."

Porter is a member of the Labour party but decided to run for the role of 
president as an independent, believing that would be the best way to serve 
students. Student support for Labour has ebbed away in recent years. A poll 
carried out before the general election suggested 50% of students were planning 
to vote for the Liberal Democrats.

Porter believes Nick Clegg's party has placed itself in a difficult position. 
After all, it promised in its manifesto to phase out fees – a hugely popular 
move. Yet in the coalition agreement the party agreed to await the outcome of 
Browne's review. Should it be unpalatable to the party, Clegg and his 
negotiating team agreed that Lib Dem MPs would abstain, allowing the review's 
conclusions to be implemented if supported by theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> and Labour. Porter knows 
that the party – and especially Cable – is under from pressure from 
vice-chancellors who insist fees must go up if they are to compete successfully 
with foreign competitors. The universities believes fees should be seen as an 
additional income on top of government funding – not an alternative.

"There are tens of thousands of students who voted for the Liberal Democrats 
on a pledge that they would not raise fees," says Porter. "It they do not stick 
to that position they will not only lose the trust of students but the general 
public. I think it would be political suicide for the Lib Dems to go into 
coalition with the Conservatives on this issue."

He goes further: "I don't believe the Lib Dems can look the electorate in the 
eye if they go back on their word. We would be happy to work with them on an 
alternative way of funding higher education." As for the Conservatives, he 
talks of a "constructive" relationship with Willetts in opposition. "He 
surprised us, a Tory minister, and I hope we surprised him as a national union."

Indeed, the politician has been full of praise for the NUS. When in opposition 
Willetts said the transformation of the union and its new way of fighting was 
"the most powerful single way of making sure that politicians listen". That was 
in October 2009, at an NUS conference. It was there that Willetts claimed the 
case for raising the cap had not been won by universities. "How would I vote 
today? I think I would say today, if the vote arose, that the case has not been 
made," he said. "This is not an argument that I believe the universities have 
won. They haven't yet properly accounted for the first £3,000 they had, so I 
would say not unless, and until, you have shown what is in it for students and 
their parents."

Porter hopes to convince Willetts that vice-chancellors have still not won the 
argument. "I don't think universities have made the case sufficiently about how 
they could improve what students receive," he says, saying the call for higher 
fees lacks "legitimacy".

Porter believes that failure by the NUS to win this argument will hurt those 
from the poorest backgrounds in the long run, who are deterred from applying to 
university. Those that do choose to study at a higher level may have to stay at 
home missing out on the extracurricular activities such as volunteering and 
clubs – not to mention learning to live independently, "to cook and wash for 
themselves".

Then there is the post-university impact. Heavy fees could mean different 
decisions about marriage, he argues, and could create a society in which 
graduates habitually rent instead of buying homes. "I recognise the pressures 
on university and college funding but they have had a decade of almost 
exponential investment and very few of them had the foresight to realise there 
might be a few years of difficulties." His argument is that it is not fair to 
burden students with the cost of that failure.

Porter perhaps owes his own political drive to his mother, who timed dinner 
with the six o'clock news when he was growing up. "I remember taking an 
unhealthy interest in the 1992 election," he says. "I was seven."

Should he fail and fees go up, he says: "I don't think vice-chancellors are so 
bloodthirsty that they would not make some grants available. But if you 
graduate with £50,000 of debt, or £80,000 or £90,000 if you are a medic... I 
would think twice." As for the struggle, it will be a bit of the old and a bit 
of the new, he says: meetings behind closed doors with the likes of Willetts, 
Cable and Browne – but an old-fashioned national demonstration to remind the 
country that students still know how to shout.
 