
We are what we eat. And we’re all different. Sometimes this causes a problem. 
As years have passed, those with backgrounds away from Africa and the Caribbean 
have developed a taste for curried goat and jerk chicken, and many delicacies 
the Windrush generation brought here with them. But are you ready for cow-foot 
soup and soused pig’s head? Try not to recoil. Both are dishes that are or have 
been eaten by indigenous communities in England.

Times change, palates change, what is permissible changes, but the pace of 
change isn’t always as people might wish. Last week I watchedan intriguing 
short documentary <http://munchies.vice.com/videos/politics-of-food-smokies/> 
on the video channel Vice Food by Ben Ferguson, a former colleague of mine. The 
subject, the Politics of Food. Ever inquisitive, Ferguson went in search of a 
West African delicacy, the smokie: an old sheep or goat, shorn, hung and its 
carcass “smoked” with a blowtorch. This gives the meat a unique flavour when 
subsequently cooked.

Smokies are illegal in the UK. There have long been health concerns about the 
preparatory procedure. The Food Standards Agency can see ways to make the 
practice safe and legal, but has been unable to persuade counterparts in 
Europe. And one can’t see Nigel Farage campaigning about it as another EU 
encroachment on sovereignty. So they could be legal, but they aren’t. In the 
meantime, those who wish to can get them on the illicit market, but only with 
the health risks inherent in an unregulated process.

This is where it gets interesting, for the urban West Africans who want 
smokies have unlikely supporters: hard-pressed Welsh farmers who have the older 
carcasses – undesirable to indigenous markets – and would love to be able to 
sell them legally. Some just do it anyway; a few have been prosecuted. We want 
the income, they tell Ferguson. But, just as much, we are fighting for the 
rights of the West Africans. Maybe.

One farmer, pixelated, shows Ferguson how the smokie is produced. One West 
African family, open and welcoming, serves him smokie meat. He seems to like it.

We regulate for health, for animal welfare, and that results in sensible 
restriction. Sometimes, as with bushmeat, it means traditional ethnic 
delicacies can’t be replicated here. So be it. But if a product can be 
humanely, safely produced and there is demand for it, isn’t that best left to 
the market?
 