
A genetic mutation may have helped early humans fend off toxic fumes that 
wafted into the air from ancient cave fires, a team of researchers claim.

The scientists say the altered DNA was found in humans but not Neanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals>, and may have given our 
early human ancestors an edge over our extinct cousins, who had also learned to 
control fire.

Researchers at Pennsylvania State University looked at what is called the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor gene which plays a role in the breakdown of certain 
noxious substances.

When organic matter such as meat or wood is burned it releases polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which can mutate DNA and cause cancer, as the 
World Health Organisation cautioned against in 2015. The PAHs are absorbed when 
we eat grilled meats or breathe in smoke. Once inside the body, their presence 
triggers aryl hydrocarbon receptors into producing enzymes that break them down 
so they can be flushed out.

But according to the research’s author Gary Perdew , when we breathe in too 
many toxic substances, just as we would in smoky caves, enzyme production goes 
into overdrive. The extra enzymes create a slew of toxic by-products that 
Perdew describes as “uber-toxicity”.

The mutation Perdew and his team identified appears to slow down enzyme 
production to a rate that limits the risk of this toxicity. They theorise this 
may have made humans less sensitive to smoke’s harmful effects, allowing them 
to be around fires more often and offered an evolutionary advantage. 
Neanderthals, who appear to lack the mutation, would have struggled with more 
smoke-related respiratory infections, fertility problems, and mortality.

“We prospered because of this mutation,” Perdew said. “I wouldn’t say 
Neanderthals died out because of it, but it could have been a contributing 
factor.”

The forerunner of modern humans and Neanderthals, Homo erectus, learned to 
control fire for warmth and cooking at least 1.9m years ago in Africa. Both 
picked up the practice from this common ancestor, but with fire came greater 
exposure to smoke in enclosed caves.

“They weren’t the greatest cooks,” said Perdew. “And it wasn’t easy to start a 
fire, so they might have kept a little fire burning all the time. They were 
probably burning grasses, whatever they could get their hands on.”

The scientists studied the gene in nine modern humans, including one from 
45,000 years ago, three Neanderthals, and one member of the related but 
mysteriousDenisovans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/30/scientists-genetic-makeup-denisovan-girl>
 in Siberia. The mutation was not present in the Neanderthals or Denisovan, but 
it was found in all of the modern humans.

If the claims hold up, the study published in Molecular Biology and Evolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/evolution> would be one of the first 
examples of human evolution in response to environmental pollution. However, 
given the small sample size of Neanderthals and the threadbare fragments of 
their DNA, the hypothesis is still tentative.

David Wright, an archaeologist at Seoul National University and the University 
of York, was cautious about the interpretation, and said that historical 
evidence does not seem to line up with the theory.

“Neanderthals were the ultimate cave-dwelling fire users. If there was some 
selective disadvantage against this, then they would have died out a long time 
before they did. But they were actually one of the more successful stories in 
human evolution and lasted a really long time compared to other hominids,” he 
said.

“That somehow Homo erectus and Neanderthals and dozens of other hominid 
species couldn’t handle sitting around a fire, it doesn’t make any sense to 
me,” he added. “The problem is it’s really difficult to test, because we can’t 
take a Neanderthal and sit them next to a fire to see how they react.”

Emily Monosson, an environmental toxicologist at the University of 
Massachusetts in Amherst said: “It wouldn’t be unexpected that being exposed to 
a contaminant that makes you sick would be a selective pressure on humans.”

However, she agreed with being cautious: “You’re talking about one helpful 
adaptation against one chemical, but there’s a lot of other harmful 
particulates in smoke.”

The team have plans to keep studying the gene to figure out where it came from 
and how it evolved.

Perdew said: “Something happened, where we picked up this mutation and we all 
have it, that’s undeniable. The question is why?”
 