
The shameful decision by the home secretary, Amber Rudd, to refuse a proper 
inquiry into possible police malpractice at Orgreave is yet another betrayal of 
justice (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
, 1 November). Documents are being withheld for 70-80 years, no evidence of 
what surveillance was carried out has been revealed, and nor has any member of 
the establishment been transparent about what policies arose out of that 
surveillance.

Hillsborough was followed by lies and cover up after cover up. It seems 
Orgreave is getting the same blinkered treatment. We need to know if there were 
covert agents provocateur. Were local magistrates leant on by Leon Brittan at 
the time of the dispute? Were demonstrators stitched up, smeared and 
deliberately entrapped?

Could the decision not to hold an inquiry be based on the fact that no Tory 
politician wants to reveal that Mrs Thatcher could have been fallible? Is it 
still too early as too many politicians are still alive?

The election of police and crime commissioners has done little to raise public 
confidence in today’s police forces. Unless we can reveal what happened in the 
past with absolute transparency we cannot have any confidence that the same 
possible malpractice is not likely today.
Helen Pender
Oakham, Rutland

• If the man on the Clapham omnibus should ever find himself at Orgreave, he’d 
ask himself, as would any reasonable person who’s actually been there, whether 
it was reasonable that a hundred mounted policemen and two hundred of their 
colleagues on foot should rock up there in battle formation on a summer’s day 
in 1984 on the off-chance of there being a bit of argy-bargy at a little coking 
plant.

The logistics of the Battle of Orgreave were trickier than those for Margaret 
Thatcher’s Falklands flotilla so it’s reasonable to suppose that something must 
have been planned. Something big. Who’d planned the stables? The field 
kitchens? The vets? The latrines? The medics? The tech support? The 
communications? The back-up riot gear? What was the contingency? The exit 
strategy? Did the police do it all themselves? What other agencies were 
involved? Who was in charge?

Reasonableness demands public answers to these and a thousand other questions. 
They set the context for the battle. After these, questions of police rules of 
engagement, of the battle itself and of its aftermath can then begin to 
be addressed.

But, needless to say, Theresa May’s cabinet wouldn’t be seen dead on an 
omnibus, in Clapham or anywhere. And the man on the Clapham omnibus would get 
decidedly short shrift from Mrs May’s cabinet. And so the home secretary 
decides there’s no need for answers and we’re expected to think that’s 
reasonable.
John Smith
Beighton, near Orgreave, South Yorkshire

• I’m sure I’m not the only one to be disgusted by Amber Rudd’s decision not 
to hold a public inquiry into Orgreave. OK, nobody died and nobody went to 
jail. But that was only because of good luck, and because the cases that did go 
to court got kicked out due to a lack of evidence. But evidence does exist that 
the police were ordered to use excessive force and indeed fabricate evidence. 
Evidence exists from journalists that the BBC completely reversed its TV 
coverage so that it looked like the miners started the violence and not the 
other way around. This matter is not about deaths or jail, but about the state 
(ie, government old or new) abusing its power, brutalising its own people and 
using both propaganda and its position to cover up its actions. That is worthy 
of any public inquiry.
Paul Dodenhoff
Leyland, Lancashire

• I remember talking to a TV news cameraman sporting a fat lip after his 
previous day covering Orgreave. His point was that he’d only been able to film 
the carnage from behind police lines so the world could only get a police-eye 
view of events. While justice is forced to take a back seat by Amber Rudd’s 
covering the backs of her predecessors, what about a properly constituted 
crowd-funded people’s tribunal to hear witness testimony from those involved at 
the time?
Chris Kaufman
London

• I suspect that today’s chaotic Tory administration would also have ruled out 
an inquiry into the Peterloo massacre. The denial of responsibility by the 
ruling oligarchy of 1819led to the creation of the Manchester Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1>. What benison can we 
expect to ensue from Ms Rudd’s handwashing?
Frank Paice
Norwich

• Could the home secretary’s surprising decision not to establish an inquiry 
into Orgreave by any chance be related to the role played by Conservative 
ministers in the miners’ strike?
Jeremy Beecham
Labour, House of Lords 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 