
In Slovenia it was the Month of Asparagus, in Turkey men wrestled in olive 
oil. In Poland I went on stage dressed as a three-year-old and in Germany I 
engaged with the great debate about whether men should stand or sit to pee. One 
starts with such high hopes, but reality is a fickle thing and makes fools of 
us all.

It was not my intention to do another journey. It never is. At the end of my 
TV series Around the World in 80 Days I said I wouldn't do anything like that 
again, and I said the same thing for the five series that followed it. I shall 
doubtless say the same after Michael Palin's New Europe. So why do I bother to 
lie? Why don't I just get the bag out, get down to the airport and get on with 
it? Part of the problem is that it's hard work and takes me away from home. Yet 
even as I write this I realise these are two of the main reasons I enjoy it. I 
love my home and my family dearly, but I'm aware that love grows in direct 
proportion to the amount of time I spend away. And as for the hard work, I need 
it to combat a dangerous tendency to sit in cafes, read books, have long 
lunches and watch all five days of a Test match.

And of course I learn a lot from my travels. Things I wouldn't learn at home, 
like how to survive on five hours' sleep a night, how to distinguish yoghurt 
from mayonnaise in hotel buffets, and how to say sorry in Pashtun.

But sharing my travels with large numbers of people across the world, on film 
and on the page, is something else altogether, and carries with it a whole lot 
of anxieties that have to be wrestled with before each new departure. Like what 
I should be telling people and why. What is my agenda? What is my purpose? What 
can I possibly tell the world that the Charles Wheelers, Colin Thubrons, Dervla 
Murphys and the like haven't already told them?

But this way madness lies. I have, for the past six series, found that it is 
better not to be too self-conscious. My approach, and it's one I'd urge on any 
would-be travel writer or journalist stepping on to a foreign dockside, is be 
yourself, and see where it gets you.

I like to travel as light as possible. I try not to go out with too many 
prejudices or come back with too many opinions. I'm frequently approached by 
people who want to know how travel has changed me and what great insights I 
might have had on dusty roads and in blazing sunsets. Now I no longer even try 
to make up an answer. Any journey away from the room you're sitting in will 
increase the potential for coming upon the unexpected and occasionally 
wonderful, but that's not to equate travel with ultimate enlightenment or 
universal solutions, any more than breathing will ensure you become president 
of the US. It helps, but that's about all. I've learned that what I like about 
travel is that it doesn't sort everything out. Actually, it doesn't sort 
anything out. Where there was certainty, it sows uncertainty, where there is 
conviction, it sows doubt, where there is comfort, it sows heat rash. It's just 
that being in unfamiliar surroundings watching unfamiliar activity is something 
I find, on the whole, deeply refreshing.

This sort of floppy, undemanding reasoning is why I usually end up packing my 
bag for some sort of journey, somewhere, even though I've said I'm not going 
to. And as I always take a notebook when I travel, why not a camera - 
especially one wielded as skilfully and discreetly as my old friend Nigel 
Meakin's? And how nice to have someone record the sounds that no notebook can 
ever capture. And wouldn't it be nice to have someone to share laughter, 
decisions and food with, someone who's not a stranger to adventure and 
recklessness, but will leave you alone when required? In short, why not take a 
film crew ?

In the case of New Europe, however, things were a little different. Since we'd 
last been on the road together in April 2004, the Saga factor had kicked in. I 
was about to turn 63 and aware of Nigel, my cameraman, being hard on my heels, 
and sound recordist John Pritchard not far behind. Meanwhile, Roger Mills, my 
hugely experienced director, was well on course to be our only septuagenarian. 
After two years away from each other, advancing age might well, I thought, 
result in polite "No thank-you"s all round, unless the new series could be set 
entirely in deckchairs. (John Pritchard had indeed come up with a title for 
such a series: Death by Luxury.)

I was quite wrong. There were not only "Yes please"s but "When do we start?"s. 
Indeed, some were keen to make this trip as tough as any of the others, and for 
a while South America was in the frame. But then there was the Archie factor. 
When we were planning the series, my wife and I were expecting our first 
grandchild, who was due to emerge less than two months before the start of 
filming. Working within a few hours' flying time from home no longer seemed 
optional, but essential.

So I started looking very seriously at Europe, the only continent our journeys 
had not yet covered and which we normally flew over in half-darkness while 
returning from Bangladesh or Bamako. Western Europe was overvisited, but the 
east, the half of Europe that used to be concealed behind the Iron Curtain, was 
much more promising. It also fulfilled one of the main criteria for choice of 
journey, being somewhere as new to me as it probably would be to most of my 
audience.

But I sensed that eastern Europe remained a turn-off for many people, for whom 
it would always be a state of mind rather than a location. Himalaya tripped 
nicely off the tongue and had an exotic, escapist image. Say eastern Europe, 
and Soviet tanks rather than snow-capped mountains come to mind. However, the 
more closely I looked at the countries we might visit, the more I realised what 
exciting things were happening there. Half a continent was being transformed. 
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the number of countries in eastern 
Europe doubled. And it's not just new names on the map, but new political 
systems, new currencies, new ideas, new problems.

In fact the N-word was repeated so often in what I read and heard that I 
realised it could be the hook for the series. If eastern Europe evoked a dour 
and shackled past, new Europe, or, as we say in television, New Europe, 
suggested present and future. Horizons of hope. Around the beginning of 2006, 
as our two directors and their respective location managers began to make their 
first visits to the eastern half of Europe, things began to fall into place. 
Countries suspicious of visitors for 50 years proved welcoming and cooperative. 
There were people who had great stories to tell and were eager to tell them. 
Word came back of landscapes like the Danube delta, the Carpathian mountains, 
Transylvania, Cappadocia and the Curonian Spit, as beautiful as any we'd seen 
in the wider world, and much less well known.

So a series of six episodes fell quite quickly into place. (It has since 
become seven.) The BBC accepted it. Archie Palin arrived, and evoked such a 
primal rush of adoration that I couldn't possibly have imagined working a 
continent away from him. And on the first day of filming none of us arrived at 
Heathrow with stick or Zimmer frame.

At risk of breaking the Trades Descriptions Act, I have to admit that new 
Europe proved very much a story of old Europe. The past intruded on almost 
every conversation we had and in every town we filmed. Not the quaint past of 
cobbled streets and church spires (though there was plenty of that), but the 
raw and shocking past of the 20th century. We in the west have fought and 
suffered through two world wars, but in eastern Europe the misery was prolonged 
and relentless. The first of our journeys, which took us down through the 
former Yugoslavia, was a reminder of how recently Europeans were fighting each 
other. As late as 1999, our boys were bombing Belgrade. In Sarajevo we talked 
to people in streets that were death traps only 13 years ago. The eloquent and 
painstaking leader of a Bosnian mine-clearance team was the same man who had 
planted some of the mines in the first place. A young Serbian told me that her 
people had no hatred for others in the Balkans, but then, with a look of bitter 
frustration, added that the same mentality that had brought Milosevic to power 
was taking things in that direction again. In the former Yugoslavia, the hurt 
is so recent that optimists can only hold their breath.

Much of the rest of east and central Europe was brutalised 50 or more years 
earlier and some of the pain is receding, partly due to the candid, 
unsensational but comprehensive preservation of concentration camps, torture 
cells and grim historical records, which make both complacency and denial that 
much more difficult.

Cities of great history and culture such as Gdansk, Warsaw, Dresden, Budapest 
and Konigsberg (now Kaliningrad) were devastated not just by Nazi and Soviet 
armies on the ground but by Allied bombers from the air.

And it went on. Eleven years after the war ended, thousands were rounded up 
and killed in Hungary following the unsuccessful uprising of 1956. As recently 
as 1991, people died under guns and tanks in Lithuania. There was civil war in 
the young republic of Moldova in 1992 when Transnistria broke away. All across 
the east of Europe the 20th century was a pattern of retribution disguised as 
liberation.

But in this new century a fragile peace has broken out across these bloodied 
lands. Whether it's from exhaustion or new-found tolerance is hard to tell, but 
I found that the confidence gained from EU membership has made an enormous 
difference (something that makes quite a change from the continuous whingeing 
with which the same subject is greeted here). For the likes of Hungary, Poland, 
Estonia, Romania and Bulgaria, membership is more than just access to money or 
freedom of trade - it's a sign that they're once again being taken seriously as 
European players (Hungary, Poland, Lithuania and the Czechs having at times had 
great and enlightened empires in Europe).

It's not clear what the future holds. Alongside relief that there is peace and 
security comes expectation. If ranks start to close again, there could be 
trouble. Countries, like the individuals of whom they are made up, want to be 
appreciated and respected. There are many we spoke to in Turkey, for instance, 
who feel themselves to be European, and cannot understand why somewhere like 
Bulgaria should be welcomed into the EU while their bid for membership is 
viewed with suspicion and often downright hostility. Raffi Portakal, an art 
entrepreneur who recently brought the first ever Picasso exhibition to Turkey, 
told me that he accepted that a club should have rules, but if that club keeps 
changing its rules then it risks losing respect and authority.

Whatever happens, I feel I have learned a lot this past year. Eastern Europe 
is no longer faceless. I can remember all 20 countries we travelled through 
(twice as many as in the Sahara and Himalaya series put together) and I can 
recall what makes each one different. I no longer see rows of concrete housing 
blocks as the only urban landscape in the east, and those I do see I now know 
much more about, including the multifarious lives going on inside them. I see 
beyond the cliche of belching smokestacks and fog-bound factories, to some of 
the most unspoiled and beautiful agricultural landscape on the continent. And 
the only Soviet tank on the move was being driven by me, at a school on the 
Polish-German border.

I've laughed as much as, if not more than, on any of the journeys so far, and 
I've done some very silly things I can't imagine being allowed to do in eastern 
Europe 20 years ago, like strutting the catwalk in a Budapest fashion show and 
appearing on Polish daytime television.

What's most important is that instead of seeing east and central Europe as a 
mysterious world into which I, as a westerner, could never be fully initiated, 
I now see it as a cultural, political extension of my own world. The bond of 
history and proximity is stronger than any ideology. We have much more in 
common than sets us apart. It's a bit like discovering a long-lost branch of 
your family. We shall doubtless still quarrel as families do, but at least we 
can get together for a party every now and then.

© Michael Palin 2007. 

· New Europe, by Michael Palin, is published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson, price 
£20. To order a copy for £16.99 with free UK p&p, go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop> or call 0870 836 0875. The TV series 
Michael Palin's New Europe begins on BBC1 at 9pm this Sunday.
 