
To be a good music manager you need to be organised, excellent with people and 
have a good understanding of the industry as it stands today.

Your basic role is to bring together the people and projects which meet the 
goals of the artist and their record company. That goal could be anything from 
generating a top 10 hit or getting a gig at Glastonbury. Either way, you have 
to co-ordinate all aspects of the project, work with individuals and 
organisations such as event promoters, publicity agents and talent-booking 
agencies – as well as the artists and record labels you represent.

It's down to you to ensure all projects run smoothly, deadlines are met and 
campaigns come together. Each party will be obsessing about their individual 
task, so it's critical for a manager to remain focused on the bigger picture 
and end goal.

Your tasks also depend on what point your client is at in their career. If an 
artist is signed to a record label, you'll need to keep in mind what they want 
to achieve for the musician. If you're managing unsigned artists, your priority 
will be to generate as much work as possible to get them noticed and paid.

Whether you're managing unknown musicians or major record labels, it's 
important to understand the field of music in which your clients operate. Each 
different type of music has its own scene, fan base and unique way of working.

It's important to research the music business you're in – or want to enter – 
and identify the key influencers, from the big promoters and broadcasters, to 
record companies. Get to know the structure of the companies you're dealing 
with too – be clear about how business is conducted, who is responsible for 
what and who the decision-makers are. Then go out and grab their attention and 
command their respect. Having an influential network helps, so always be 
professional but friendly and approachable to maintain and create new contacts.

You will also need to be able to cope well under pressure. Dealing with a 
range of different characters and organisations, all with their own pressures, 
can be challenging. When someone loses their cool you have to make sure you 
don't – it's your job to keep calm, see the strategic picture and put out the 
fires that other people start.

If you're looking for a way into management then having a presence at the 
right places is a great way to get noticed. Many managers get appointed in all 
types of situations, such as gigs or clubs as nearly all the key people will be 
there.

Most managers start as promoters, assistants, engineers or even artists. 
Putting time in at different levels of the industry will arm you well in the 
future. The best way to start is to get experience in different departments and 
work your way up.

Starting you own operation is a great way to break into management and will 
gain you some real experience. It may feel like you're at the bottom of a 
mountain, but it won't be long until you find yourself half way to the top.

The music business is a great industry to work in, but to be a manager 
requires drive and determination which is driven by a passion for music. It's 
fiercely competitive but, once you've made it, it can be one of the most 
fulfilling and often financially rewarding careers.

David Elkabas is co-director of MN2S Label Group <http://mn2s.com/labelgroup/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 