
You can't turn on the TV, pick up a paper or browse the internet without 
something American coming back at you. The country is obviously a major player 
in the world, but why does the UK catch a cold when America sneezes? Why do its 
presidential campaigns go on forever? And why do Americans write better TV 
comedies? A master's could provide the answers.

What will I study?

Brian Ward, English and American studies professor, University of Manchester 
We have two pathways on our American studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> MA; one for history and 
one for literature and culture. Students take a common core course called 
American studies: histories, theories and methods, before choosing two courses 
from a range of options.

Leonora Baird-Smith, MA Latin American art and architecture student, 
University of Essex
There are two core modules on the course; one gives an overview of fine art in 
Latin America, and the other concentrates on the fusion of indigenous and 
European art in colonial Latin America. You then choose two other modules.

John Fagg, MA American studies graduate, University of Nottingham 
In the first semester we covered two modules introducing 20th-century American 
culture - through examples of culture, novels and film. In the second semester 
there were optional modules. I wrote my dissertation on Stephen Crane, the late 
19th-century writer.

Why do American studies?

Ward: 
America has long influenced the culture, economics, politics and social 
affairs of much of the world. American studies allows students to explore the 
US and its colonial precursors, enabling them to understand the roots and 
changing nature of America's global influence - and with it a good deal about 
the workings of the modern world.

Baird-Smith: 
I developed an interest in Mexican popular art while travelling in Central 
America. I also worked in the ethnography department of the British Museum 
cataloguing South and Central American material after I graduated with a degree 
in fine art. As I wanted to progress in a career in museums, I'd been thinking 
about an MA. I then came across the MA course at Essex which concentrates fully 
on the art of the continent rather than offering it as a subject to study 
alongside politics or Spanish.

Fagg: 
I studied English and philosophy at undergraduate level and was thinking about 
a career in academia so I was looking for a course that picked up on things I 
was interested in. In our globalised world, America is a major player and our 
culture is very much their culture too, so it creates a reason for thinking 
about America in Britain.

What are the job prospects?

Ward: 
Because American studies is inherently interdisciplinary, it promotes a 
flexibility of thought that many employers find attractive. At MA level, 
students also demonstrate a capacity for independent research and an ability to 
present complex ideas clearly that are relevant to any number of careers - 
including business (where specialist knowledge of the US can be useful), 
teaching, law, accountancy, publishing, media and higher education.

Baird-Smith: 
Graduates of the MA can go into further education in the form of PhDs, work in 
museums or teaching. I have applied for a PhD at Essex and have also been 
contacted by the British Museum about possible employment.

Fagg: 
I went on to do a PhD and I'm now a research fellow at Nottingham and have a 
contract to lecture from September. Most of the people in my year went on to do 
PhDs. But one of the benefits of the master's is you're differentiating 
yourself from people with 2:1s and firsts at undergraduate level.

Can I get funding?

Ward: 
Prospective MA students can apply for one of the five competitive bursaries, 
currently worth £3,000, available in the English and American studies subject 
area. We also support applications to the Arts and Humanities Research Council 
(AHRC) for MA study.

Baird-Smith: 
I applied for AHRC funding, which unfortunately I didn't get, but was offered 
a bursary by the university, which has been of great help.

Fagg: 
I didn't receive any funding to do my master's, but during the course I 
applied for an AHRC funding award for PhD study, which I received.

Course links

MA in American studies, University of Manchester 
manchester.ac.uk <http://www.manchester.ac.uk>
Cost £3,240 full-time or £1,620 per year part-time (subject to change for 2008 
entry).
Duration 1yr full-time, 2yrs part-time.

MA in Latin American art and architecture, University of Essex 
essex.ac.uk <http://www.essex.ac.uk>
Cost £3,500 ft, £1,750 per year pt. 
Duration 1yr ft, 2yrs pt.

MA American studies, University of Nottingham
nottingham.ac.uk <http://www.nottingham.ac.uk> 
Cost £3,750. 
Duration 1yr ft, 2-4yrs pt.

· Costs for UK/EU students
 