
Australia is a country of extremes, so it is hardly surprising that the 
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> has an 
extreme heat policy. The first line states that it will be "applied at the 
referee's discretion and may be altered at any time" – the result being that 
nobody, players and fans alike, have the faintest idea of when it will be 
invoked. It was tempting to think on the 10th day of the tournament that Wayne 
McKewen, the tournament referee, was sitting in his air-conditioned room, 
smiling benignly and muttering "Heat, what heat?"

Anybody who ventured outside, where the temperature was in the high 30s during 
the morning, and then soared over 40C, came back looking like they had spent a 
week in the Sahara doing 15 rounds with Muhammad Ali at his prime. McKewen – 
perhaps a cold-blooded man who wears a jumper on the beach – paid no heed.

When he was an umpire he once warned Andre Agassi for spitting and swearing, 
the American contending that this would not have happened if McKewen had not 
had "something personal against me". Today there were those who wondered if 
McKewen had something personal against all the players, with a number of 
juniors having to play in conditions that were totally unreasonable, and 
arguably dangerous.

Eventually he conceded that it was too darned hot. The roofs on the Rod Laver 
Arena and the Hisense stadium rolled shut, and on the outside courts play was 
stopped. Nobody much likes it when this tournament changes from outdoor to 
indoor, but the television and radio stations had been blaring all the previous 
day about record temperatures, with the appropriate warnings in this land of 
skin cancer. McKewen played the ostrich.

Russia's Elena Dementieva, attempting to win her first slam title, having been 
runner-up at the French and US Opens in 2004, was surprised the roof was not 
closed before her quarter-final against Carla Suárez Navarro of Spain who she 
beat 6–2, 6–2. "It looks like nobody knows how the heat policy works. It felt 
like 45C inside the centre court. You see the forecast. Why not close the roof? 
It was a very strong sun and very dangerous."

Dementieva plays Serena Williams in tomorrow's semi-finals, the other being an 
all-Russian affair between Dinara Safina and Vera Zvonareva. Williams, the 
champion here in 2003, 2005 and 2007 – and looking to extend this sequence – 
reached the last four with a 5–7, 7–5, 6–1 over yet another Russian, Svetlana 
Kuznetsova.

The first set of that quarter-final was played in the open, and then the roof 
was closed, as it may have to be for the semi-finals. This may be to Williams's 
slight advantage. She holds a 4–3 lead over Dementieva, although the Russian, 
who won the singles gold medal at the Beijing Olympics last year and who is 
extremely fit, has prevailed in their last three matches, including the 
semi-finals of the pre-Australian Open tournament in Sydney. "Every time it is 
different against Serena. You don't know what to expect from her," said 
Dementieva. "I think she likes to play here, and feels pretty comfortable on 
the surface, so it's going to be a tough match."

Kuznetsova was angry the roof was closed – you can never please everyone – 
simply because she was feeling so comfortable. Williams was not. "It was really 
an out-of-body experience. I felt like I was watching somebody play in a blue 
dress and it wasn't me." Kuznetsova knew it was, and at 7–5, 5–4 choked, 
winning only one more game as her own private roof fell in.
 