
The Socceroos are off and running on the road to Russia, overcoming a dogged 
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iraq> with a 2-0 World Cup 
qualifying win in Perth. Second-half goals to Massimo Luongo and Tomi Juric on 
Thursday night ensured the right result for Ange Postecoglou’s side on an 
evening that almost threatened to end sourly.

A first half of frustration gave way just before the hour mark, when Luongo 
arrived on the spot to thrash home Juric’s squared ball. The striker made sure 
of the result on 65 minutes, when Mark Milligan successfully drew attention 
from Aaron Mooy’s corner, allowing Juric to tap home from a metre.

Australia beat Iraq in World Cup 2018 qualifying – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/01/australia-v-iraq-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live>
The result – if not the performance – will please Postecoglou, who spoke of 
the importance of winning home games during this decisive qualifying group 
stage. Sterner tests await, including the United Arab Emirates next Tuesday in 
scorching Abu Dhabi heat.

But with a shot count of 20-6 and 72% of possession, the Socceroos can be 
content to avoid a banana peel during the first of 10 qualifiers leading to the 
2018 tournament.


Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> were denied twice 
by the woodwork before cutting through, and allowed simple errors to creep into 
their play, almost in exasperation.

On 26 minutes, Mathew Leckie’s majestic long-range header reduced goalkeeper 
Mohammed Hameed to a bystander, only to bounce off the inside of the post and 
away. Mile Jedinak, who was uncharacteristically astray in his passing, headed 
Mooy’s cross just over.

At half-time, it felt like the Socceroos had control of the play, but not the 
contest. Improved intensity after the break soon had the Iraqis swamped and a 
fine move between Jedinak and Mathew Leckie ended with Mooy crashing an effort 
onto the bar.

Australia had their swagger back, and a breakthrough seemed inevitable. When 
it did come on 58 minutes, Juric was the most grateful man at nib Stadium.

The beanpole striker contrived to botch the simplest of tap-ins but, a minute 
later, had his redemption. He picked himself up after the abominable miss, 
crossing for Luongo, who didn’t make the same mistake.

Australia didn’t let up, and it was Juric who made the game safe from Mooy’s 
set piece shortly after.
 