
When Australia lost in a friendly against Greece in June this year for some in 
the media and many in the stadium the knives were out. The Socceroos were 
“sluggish”, “poor in possession”, “too slow on the ball”. Yet just three nights 
earlier when Mathew Leckie’s stoppage-time goal had givenAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> a deserved lead, it was all 
lofty praise as the lowly-rated (at least by Fifa) home side stuck it to 
European opposition that less than five years earlier was nestled in the 
world’s top ten.

But rather than players of the calibre of Aaron Mooy, Tom Rogic or Mark 
Milligan suddenly “getting rusty” the change in fortune had more to do with 
what the opposition was doing differently than Australia suddenly executing 
poorly.

Similarly, in being overly critical of Australia’s first half performance 
againstJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/japan> you take deserved 
credit away from the very disciplined and organised work of the visiting 
Samurai Blue.

Socceroos held by cagey Japan in World Cup qualifying stalemate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/socceroos-held-by-cagey-japan-in-world-cup-qualifying-stalemate>
On countless occasions Australia appeared to turn over possession far too 
cheaply, trying to play long and direct to the feet of Tomi Juric or Apostolos 
Giannou. Look closer at Japan though and you’d see a compact midfield, at times 
with five players bustling to give the Socceroos midfielders no time or space, 
with the captain Makoto Hasebe in particular excellent in hounding Rogic and 
cutting off supply to the Socceroos’ key playmaker.

Shinji Kagawa, a player who has played at the very top of league football in 
England and Germany, was in particular tireless in his efforts to both drop 
deep to stifle passes in to Mooy or Massimo Luongo, yet also rush forward to 
help support the otherwise isolated Keisuke Honda up front.

 No surprise therefore that when Trent Sainsbury attempted to play an early 
ball to Mooy the Huddersfield Town man was immediately double-teamed (by Kagawa 
and goalscorer Genki Haraguchi). A turnover was affected and Australia paid the 
highest price in a slick counter-attacking move.

Veteran Bosnian coach Vahid Halilhodžić – under pressure in Japan for 
perceived poor results and facing player discontent 
<http://www.foxsportsasia.com/football/asian-football/news/detail/item530822/japan-coach-pressure/>
 – made a show of billing his side as underdogs pre-game, and set his side up 
first and foremost with the aim of trying to earn a point away from home.

But in handing more defensive roles to his two brightest attacking players, 
Kagawa and Honda, Japan’s coach badly blunted his own attack. The gamble worked 
for two-thirds of the match – but as the players tired due their high defensive 
workload Australia looked increasingly dangerous.

Brad Smith began to find more space from fullback. Rogic began to elude his 
markers and get on the ball facing forwards. By the time the fresh faces of 
Robbie Kruse, Tim Cahill and Leckie had entered the fray it was the Socceroos 
who increasingly looked the team more likely to end as winners.

For traditionalists of Japanese football this approach would have made for 
hard viewing. For a team, so long the pre-eminent footballing nation in Asia, 
famed for its technical proficiency and short passing game to cede possession 
and territory to a seemingly ‘less sophisticated’ side like Australia adds yet 
another footnote to the ongoing re-balancing of powers between arguably Asia’s 
two best sides.

Ten years ago the Socceroos of Kaiserlautern hustled and bustled the skillful 
but short Japanese – with even Guus Hiddink looking to the aerial route lumping 
on first Cahill, then Josh Kennedy, then John Aloisi to chase a result. It 
should be a feather in a cap of Ange Postecoglou’s Socceroos that a team with 
players of the calibre of Honda or Kagawa instead of dominating Australia would 
increasingly look to sit back and counterpunch.

For Postecoglou, despite professed disappointment in draws against both Saudi 
Arabia and Japan, the haul of 8 points in four games would still remain a very 
decent start to this campaign.

Of greater concern however is the knowledge that Saudi Arabia and United Arab 
Emirates – two sides that demonstrated the ability to hurt Australia in quick 
transitions – will look to this result and this approach from Japan as a 
template for how to play away from home against Australia.

Slip ups happen in football. Were it not for Mat Ryan’s excellent late save 
against Kagawa, Australia could have departed this match pointless. Had Takuma 
Asano not failed by mere centimetres in connecting with an excellent late cross 
Halilhodžić’s game plan could have worked to perfection.

Australia has fought under Ange Postecoglou for the right to dictate games of 
football against sides that were once regarded as more skillful. But now as 
others in Asia adapt to the Socceroos’ attacking style of play a whole new set 
of challenges arise.
 