
The Socceroos have hung on for a 2-2 draw with Saudi Arabia as striker Nasser 
Al Shamrani again proved the troublemaker againstAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>. A draw may disappoint but the 
Socceroos’ improving mentality bodes well for World Cup campaign.

If a scrappy equaliser blots Australia’s copybook the difference in mentality 
between Australia and Saudi Arabia speaks volumes as to the Socceroos’ 
long-term maturation. Amid the hot and humid conditions of Jeddah’s King 
Abdullah Stadium, Socceroos boss Ange Postecoglou captured the team’s mood 
post-game accurately and succinctly: “It’s a good point, but you feel we could 
have got more out of it.”

An objective onlooker, he isn’t. But even the most partisan fan would struggle 
to dispute his assessment. In a fleeting vignette of their potential Saudi 
Arabia started the brighter of the two sides, hurrying and harrying the 
Australian defence with a high press, and striking with a clarity of purpose 
and quality of execution.

Their fifth-minute goal followed excellent lead up work from Nawaf Al Abid, 
who used close control and an attacking mindset to put a sharp ball through for 
Yahia Al Shehri, whose inch-perfect cutback was well dispatched by the 
late-arriving Taiseer Al Jassam.

It was a passage of play that cut straight through the Australian defence and 
sent an early warning shot across the bows of those that denigrate the 
ever-increasing quality of Asian football.

Arsène Wenger’s Arsenal future will be mutually decided, says chief executive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/arsene-wenger-arsenal-future-will-be-mutually-decided-chief-executive-ivan-gazidis>
And yet, with Australia seemingly there for the taking, two serious 
limitations – a creeping psychological fragility and Dutch coach Bert van 
Marwijk’s conservative inclination – always presented as a potential limitation 
for the home side.

A coach can only play the cards he is dealt but van Marwijk showed his hand at 
the 2010 World Cup. Given aces like Robin van Persie, Arjen Robben or Rafael 
van der Vaart the former Feyenoord boss gambled on eights and nines.

The pragmatist will say van Marwijk saw in twin enforcers Mark van Bommel and 
Nigel de Jong a comparative advantage for his nation, and exploited that 
ruthlessly as the Dutch shaded five consecutive games by a one-goal margin en 
route to one of the more notorious finals in recent history. But those who hang 
their cap on the hatstand of results quickly fade when the fixtures turn.

With the crowd behind them, confidence streaming through the players, this 
game was Saudi Arabia’s to lose. The usually excellent Aaron Mooy missed 
passes. Robbie Kruse and Mathew Leckie returned to ponderousness in attack, 
even skipper Mile Jedinak looked lumbering, a needless yellow card following 
one particular cameo in rustiness.

But if Saudi Arabia invited their opponents upon them, then conversely 
Australia deserve praise for the manner in which they accepted the invitation.

As the half developed the Socceroos began to raise their intensity. Mooy’s 
industry began to sway the balance in the heart of the field, Rogic 
increasingly looked the pre-eminent playmaker on the pitch and by the time Brad 
Smith, nervous in his opening exchanges, decided to take on his man, work 
inside and produce a driving run and shot that clattered the post, Australia 
were well and truly in the ascendency.

It was Trent Sainsbury who executed the goal, but it was an equaliser that 
hailed from the ongoing project of self-belief that Ange Postecoglou has spent 
years trying to instil within the Socceroos.

The 51,616 strong crowd arrived in pageantry with a stunning half-stadium tifo 
to support their side and had a vocal lead supporter – half capo, half muezzin 
– calling the Green Falcons on to victory, but they were silenced. For all the 
bombast pre-game of making King Abdullah Stadium “hell” for the Socceroos, the 
crowd rarely seemed a factor for Australia.

Instead of trusting in the talent of Al Abid, Al Shehri or Al Jassam to once 
again crack open Australia, Saudi Arabia instead leant on gamesmanship – 
shoelaces refused to stay tied; cramps laid low athletes in their prime, and 
the goalkeeper played with ribs of rare Venetian glass.

As Postecoglou bellowed for his team to keep focus, to stay sharp and to rise 
above, van Marwijk looked uneasy, eyes twitching as he paced the technical 
area. The otherwise excellent Omar Hawsawi succumbed to injury, but the 
Socceroos refused to allow what initially looked a dubious call for the 
stretcher to break their rhythm. And less than a minute later they took a 
deserved lead.

Kruse – too often Australia’s Theo Walcott – executed a perfect arching cross. 
Tomi Juric, another who continues to grow into his role was on hand to finish 
ruthlessly.

Stop the contest there and Postecoglou and his men, as they did against the 
UAE, have executed their game plan to absolute perfection, overcoming 
near-inhumane conditions and numerous logistical challenges to land another 
emphatic blow on an Asian powerhouse.

But after an eighteen month absence from the national side, Al Shamrani was 
always bristling to become the defining narrative. Like so many champions, the 
five-time Saudi domestic league golden boot winner displays a confidence that 
on a daily basis would prove unbearable. But the renewed hope his substitution 
gave the crowd and the confidence his goal gave his teammates was notable.

The Socceroos might feel aggrieved to have dropped potentially crucial points, 
but the improved mentality they showed throughout this performance places them 
in good stead for the campaign ahead. Japan on Tuesday is a litmus test, but 
irrespective of individual results a long-run trend of maturation and 
self-belief continues to develop.
 