
An uncharacteristically cautious Japan side came away from Etihad Stadium with 
a precious point in World Cup qualifying after holdingAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> to a 1-1 draw – the Socceroos’ 
second draw in a week.

Ange Postecoglou’s side remain on course to reach the tournament in Russia, 
but their path may have become that bit less straightforward after dropping 
points away in Saudi Arabia last week and now at home against their old Asian 
foes.

Socceroos posed a different set of headaches by a more cautious Japan | 
Richard Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/socceroos-posed-headaches-by-cautious-japan>
The hosts fell behind early on – just as they had done during last week’s 2-2 
draw in Jeddah – when Trent Sainsbury was made to rue a poor clearance out of 
defence that gifted possession to the visitors and led to Genki Haraguchi 
slotting past Mat Ryan within five minutes.

But to the relief of a 48,000-strong Melburnian crowd, a point was salvaged 
after Haraguchi went from hero to villain in the second half, upending Tommy 
Juric in the penalty area and allowing the Socceroos skipper, Mile Jedinak, the 
chance to convert from the spot.

The result sees Australia fall from top spot in Group B, after Saudi Arabia 
leapfrogged them with a later 3-0 win over United Arab Emirates in Jeddah. Just 
the top two are assured of passage to Russia.

A point could have become three had the Socceroos managed to convert their 
second half dominance into another goal – they were rampant in the final 20 
minutes as they chased a winner, but their transformation from frog to prince 
came too late for a victory.


They remain a point ahead of arch-rivals Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/japan> and still own their qualifying 
destiny with six matches left on the road to the 2018 tournament in Russia.

The Socceroos started without confidence and soon fell behind as Japan 
frustrated the home side and their fans in the stands out-sang locals. Playing 
with a 4-4-2 system, including surprise selection Apostolos Giannou alongside 
Tomi Juric up front, the Socceroos couldn’t cut through.

Australia subsisted on set pieces in a lacklustre first stanza. Matthew 
Spiranovic headed Aaron Mooy’s cross over and Jedinak brought a save out of 
Shusaku Nishikawa from a direct free-kick.

The break Australia desperately needed came on 51 minutes, when Juric was 
bundled over in the box by Japan’s goalscorer following Brad Smith’s 
intelligent run and cross.

The Socceroos, reverting to their usual 4-3-3 formation, were on top and 
Postecoglou gave substitutes Robbie Kruse and Tim Cahill half an hour to help 
find a winner.

While Matthew Spiranovic headed a late corner over, it was Japan who came 
closest to a second goal, Takuma Asano unlucky not to connect with Haraguchi’s 
cross with Ryan beaten.

“It wasn’t sluggish,” Jedinak said after the game. “We just got sucked into a 
trap. We expected a reaction from ourselves and that’s what we got. Second half 
we were a bit more patient, our movement was better and we put them on the back 
foot.”
 