
In Kenya, Zambia, Malawi and Tanzania, some of the world's poorest people are 
using sunshine to improve their lives, thanks to SolarAid.

Set up by Solarcentury in 2006, the charity helps local entrepreneurs replace 
harmful kerosene with solar power to light homes, charge mobile phones, power 
rural communities and create "sunny schools".

Solarcentury is a business with an explicit sustainable purpose: to fight 
climate change.

But while the company gives 5% of its profits to SolarAid, its social impact 
can increasingly be found much closer to home.

The solar energy company runs Solar4Schools to provide photovoltaic (PV) 
electricity to UK schools.

In 2010 it also worked with over 50 housing associations to help reduce fuel 
poverty in social housing.

Both these projects make solar power accessible to more people in areas where 
previously it may not have been viable – whether for financial or social 
reasons, or because of lack of awareness.

Over 260 schools have gone solar since 2008. And last year – working with 
partners GE Capital and the ethical bank Triodos – the company made 
Solar4Schools even more accessible, providing finance to bring solar into 
education with minimal upfront costs.

Importantly, the government-backed solar feed-in tariff (FiT) – a financial 
incentive to install PV power on UK buildings – has encouraged wider uptake 
since it launched in April 2010.

FiT rewards PV system owners for every unit of electricity they generate over 
a guaranteed period of 25 years.

For example, an average three-bedroom home will earn around £900 a year from 
its energy company by generating solar electricity, on top of a likely £140 
reduction on household energy bills.

Solarcentury campaigned for the FiT tariff to be set at a rate that would 
trigger wide investment, and between April and June last year saw the number of 
its PV installers double.

The important issue for social housing is fuel poverty, a problem that is 
exacerbated by rising fuel costs.

Fuel poverty is a particular concern for people on lower incomes and 
Solarcentury is working with organisations like the South Yorkshire Housing 
Association (SYHA) to address it.

Each solar system installed is expected to meet around 30% of tenants' 
electricity consumption and provide an annual saving of £130.

The income received by housing associations goes towards creating jobs and 
investing in other energy efficient schemes.

SYHA's LiveGreen team spokesman, Craig Jackson, said: "I urge housing 
associations to look at the long-term investment prospects … the reasons go 
beyond the environmental and social – they're now economic."

The fact that Solar4Schools reaches the youngest generation proves it is 
inherently sustainable, says the company, which also provides lesson plans and 
teacher kits so that schools can see the amount of electricity they generate 
and calculate their CO2 savings.

Solarcentury is currently working with Merton borough council. Councillor 
Stephen Alambritis said: "We intend to roll out this initiative to all our 
schools … [it] is very beneficial to our children's education and during these 
difficult times it's a good income stream for the borough."

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 