
For two decades Fatima Jibrell has fought Somalia's 'charcoal terrorists', 
armed gangs who run a lucrative trade burning Somalia's meagre forest reserves 
in order to export charcoal to the desert states of the Gulf. Swathed in 
traditional Islamic veils, this 62 year old woman may not appear the most 
likely eco-warrior but her efforts to stop Somalia's environmental devastation 
have been vital for Somalia's pastoralist communities. When Fatima returned 
home from America in the 1990s, she found the North East region of Puntland, 
where she had been born and raised, unrecognisable. "I spent my childhood 
herding my family's goats between the Red Sea and savannah plains of Sannag. We 
used to have lions and wildlife, now all I saw was just sandstorms and desert, 
with rain washing off the top soil to the sea." Little has changed in the last 
two decades. Amidst little economic activity, young men are lured by the 
promise of opportunities on the coast where they often join the ranks of the 
infamous Red Sea pirates. Their alternative is to remain inland and earn money 
through the charcoal trade.

Somalia has been declared a 'failed state' by the international community, it 
has been without an effective government since 1991 and 1 million people to 
date have died from famine, disease and conflict. The country is divided 
between territorial war lords and there is no functioning legal system: as a 
result lawlessness is rife and both journalists and aid agencies are reluctant 
to risk entering Somalia's borders. In 2008 the watch dog 'Reporters without 
Borders', which works globally to protect press freedom, described it as 
'Africa's deadliest country'. Unwilling to enter the fighting zone, development 
professionals and diplomats are forced to find a solution from the relatively 
secure capital of neighbouring Kenya. These conferences have had little success 
so far and despite the latest attempt in 2004 to establish a functioning 
government, the fighting continues and Somalia's people suffer.

Fatima saw her community's nomadic existence also being threatened by the 
changes in the environment. With few economic opportunities the majority of the 
population is dependent on a pastoralist lifestyle, herding livestock over 
Somalia's arid landscape; however this too has come under threat, due to 
relentless deforestation. This is a problem that stretches beyond Somalia's 
borders and into the wider Equatorial African region. Africa now has the 
highest rate of deforestation in the world, four times the global average 
according to a report this year by the 'Rights and Resources Initiative'. 
Wangari Mathai, Nobel Prize winner for her fight against deforestation in 
Kenya, knows first-hand that "When the forest dies, the crops fail and the 
rivers dry up. The hunger comes." One third of Somalia's population now depends 
on food aid.

Fatima's response was to set up 'Horn Relief', an organisation that tackles 
the problems of Somalia's nomadic communities on the ground. Projects in such 
an unstable political and social landscape are constantly at risk. Profit from 
charcoal has allowed traders to buy guns and miraa, a natural drug that keeps 
them alert and aggressive, organised into militias they have driven communities 
off their lands, lighting bushfires and returning to collect the charcoal 
later. Aid workers are extremely vulnerable and last year 'Horn Relief's' Head 
of Office in the South, Mr Ahmed Moalim Bario, was murdered. "The South is more 
dangerous than the North' Fatima explains 'there is clan struggle and religious 
groupings. People may kidnap you but they won't kill you in the North, in the 
South they do". Her references to kidnappings come from her own experiences in 
Puntland where she has been raided on numerous occasions. She says that her 
status as an older, Muslim woman has helped rather than hindered her in such 
situations, "Women have to endure a lot in Somalia with many of our cultural 
practices and rituals, but an older woman holds a certain place in our society. 
You have more authority, you are someone's grandmother, someone's aunt and 
these positions mean a great deal in our culture." She believes that had she 
been a man, her work would have been met with much more aggression and she 
would have been extorted to pay many more bribes.

Local communities are heavily reliant on charcoal for fuel, however it is the 
high demand from the Gulf that has turned charcoal into Somalia's 'black gold' 
and driven the practice. A report by a local research institution, the 'Academy 
of Peace and Development', revealed that 2.5million trees are felled each year 
for charcoal production. Mary Rice from the 'Environmental Investigation 
Agency', an organisation that exposes international environmental crimes, 
explains that "Charcoal burning is a local practice but when put on a 
commercial, international scale it becomes something much more systematic, 
widespread and damaging. International commercial interests often have a 
significant impact in worsening environmental issues." 'Horn Relief's' 
solutions to encroaching desertification of Somalia follow a two pronged 
strategy, firstly to bring in legislation to ban charcoal burning and secondly 
to educate the communities as to the harmful effects of the practice and work 
with them to mitigate further environmental degradation. Fatima has had some 
great successes, in 1999 the Puntland authorities were persuaded to ban the 
commercial sale of charcoal and as a result of her efforts she won the 
prestigious Goldman Environmental price in 2002. She is now working with local 
pastoralists to plant trees, use solar cookers and promote grass cultivation 
amongst many other initiatives.

Despite all the risks Fatima remains defiant and fearless and says that she 
wouldn't hesitate to return to Somalia to continue her work "I cannot send 
young people and then not go myself, if it's good enough for others good enough 
for me. We are Somalis and people are suffering, sometimes that means we must 
go where it's dangerous." She is the epitome of an eco-warrior.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 