
Have I been watching too much television, or is there something slightly 
Father Ted about Ireland's new managerial team of Steve Staunton and Sir Bobby 
Robson? There's the wide-eyed, slightly spaced out younger one. Then there's 
the grey-haired older one who talks a lot and keeps getting a bit flustered. 
Together they faced the press this week. I am the gaffer. Oh yes, Bobby. Ooh 
yes. What am I again, Bobby?

What with the continuing inanities surrounding Sven-Goran Eriksson, 
international football has suddenly become very fashionable. Most exciting of 
all, the African Nations Cup gets into its stride today after last night's 
desert derby opener between Egypt and Libya.

The tournament kicks off with African football in a state of flux. This is 
nothing new. African football is always in a state of flux. The most recent 
convulsion has its roots in a falling away in the fortunes of the traditional 
local giants. Togo, Angola and Ivory Coast have qualified for this summer's 
World Cup, ahead of Nigeria, Egypt and Cameroon. This has only added to the 
fascination of the Nations Cup, which retains the kind of mystery attached to 
the World Cup before the advent of rolling 24-hour satellite Ecuadorian League 
action. You haven't heard of most of the players, even the good ones (Laughter 
Chilembi of Zambia anyone?). Helpfully, the Zimbabwe coach Charles Mhlauri has 
his own groovy homemade website which tells you that his father was "an Omnibus 
driver", that he attended a Methodist boarding school and that he appears to be 
about 25 years old.

But what about the football? Africa's refusal to get on with becoming a 
dominant global force has been the subject of much head-scratching. Pele 
famously predicted an African team would win the World Cup before the end of 
the last century. And though Pele has been famously wrong about lots of other 
things too - understandable when you spend your time being helicoptered between 
awards ceremonies wearing a solid gold top hat - the sense of underachievement 
remains.

In the past there was much talk of African "naivety": terrible defending, 
woeful indiscipline, a cheerful ignorance of the active/inactive offside law. 
European coaches were hired - brooding, itinerant Frenchmen, inscrutable Slavs 
and vaguely Hasselhoffish Germans. And for a while neurotic defence became the 
norm. This culminated in the mind-numbing 2002 Nations Cup, which featured 
eight 0-0 draws in the group stages alone.

More to the point, African football has been continually undermined by the 
kind of organisational chaos that would have a pub third XI trooping sulkily 
back to its Vauxhall Novas. This week Togo almost didn't make the plane to 
Cairo after the obligatory stand-off over bonus money. In November Nigeria 
turned up for a friendly in Romania four hours before kick-off and with only 10 
men, eventually taking to the field after the players had stumped up for their 
own shirts and persuaded their hosts to stand them a meal. They lost 3-0.

Despite this there is talk of a general strengthening in depth. Ivory Coast, 
in particular, have a rigorously efficient academy system. The first African 
World Cup takes place in South Africa in 2010. Pele has already tipped an 
African team to win it. You never know. One of these days he's going to get one 
right.
 