
The people of Cambodia have seen more suffering than most. For 30 years the 
victim of cold war politics, incessant fighting, aerial bombardment, political 
violence and crimes against humanity, the country is now beginning to redefine 
itself as a blossoming tourist destination. The present government is stable 
and democratically elected - after a fashion - the civil wars seem to be over, 
and visitors can once again enjoy the crumbling beauty of Phnom Penh, the 
beaches of Sihanoukville and the soaring splendour of Angkor Wat.

Not so long ago, a visitor to Phnom Penh would be concerned with avoiding 
being robbed, kidnapped or shot. Now, my biggest worry, as I perch precariously 
on the back of one of the small Honda Cubs that serve as the main form of hired 
transport in this town, is simply that I won't survive the traffic. Anarchic is 
an understatement. Everything travels in every direction at once, in an ebb and 
a flow that seems qualified only by weight of numbers at one time in any one 
direction.

The French built this city in the style of the Mediterranean. Wide, tree-lined 
boulevards are flanked by ochre villas. The heart of the city is Siseowath Quay 
on the banks of the Tonlé Sap River. The Grand Palace and the National Museum 
are both situated here, and their faded royal grandeur is worth a morning's 
visit. It is also here that you will find the best of the city's restaurants: 
there is no more relaxing place in Asia to enjoy a meal or a drink.

The main north-south thoroughfares of Norodom and Moninvong Boulevards are 
interspersed with monuments both ancient and modern, but it is not until one 
turns off the main streets that the physical signs of recent history become 
apparent. Potholes large enough to live in have been left unfilled, and exposed 
wires trail in precarious tangles across every street.

To try to come to an understanding of the desolation of this once peaceful 
backwater, I made my way through the back lanes of southern Phnom Penh towards 
the museum of Tuol Sleng. On winning the civil war against the US-backed 
government in 1975, Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge emptied Phnom Penh completely and 
drove the entire population, including the sick and the dying, into the 
countryside. They turned the whole of Cambodia into one large, starvation 
driven, terrorised work camp. Anyone who maintained the least contact with the 
old regime was murdered. The Khmer Rouge would torture and kill for acts as 
subversive as wearing glasses or speaking in a foreign language.

 Up to two million people died as the result of torture, starvation and 
wholesale purges. Now a genocide museum, Tuol Sleng - or 'S21' - was a former 
school that was converted into the regional Phnom Penh torture centre (there 
were several others throughout Cambodia) where 'confessions' were extracted 
from people who generally had no idea why they had been arrested in the first 
place. With macabre efficiency, the Khmer Rouge photographed all the prisoners 
for their records before torturing and killing them. The walls of Tuol Sleng 
are lined with thousands of faces, all staring into the eyes of death.

When the Vietnamese liberated Phnom Penh, the Khmer Rouge carried on their 
work to the final minute: unfortunate victims were found still chained to the 
metal beds on which they had been murdered. After being 'processed' at Tuol 
Sleng, the enemies of Angkar - or 'the organisation' - were taken to the 
killing fields south of the city where they were bludgeoned to death. It is 
still possible to visit the killing fields of Cheoung Ek. There is a Buddhist 
stupa there, in which are housed the skulls of the victims, and fresh fragments 
of bones and clothing rise to the surface of the earth with every new rainy 
season.

Although these recent tragedies have defined modern Phnom Penh, it is the past 
glories of Angkor that give Cambodia its soul. A fast, early morning passenger 
boat from Phnom Penh is the best way to reach the sleepy northern town of Siem 
Reap, from where one can spend days or weeks wandering around the ancient ruins 
of the jungle city. The boat takes you up the Tonlé Sap River and into the 
great inland Tonlé Sap lake. The waters of the Tonlé Sap are the lifeblood of 
the country, and the banks are dotted with fishing villages consisting of brief 
piers and stilted houses.

In early June, at the commencement of the annual rainy season, the water level 
of the Mekong River rises substantially, enough to divert part of its flow off 
its course to the South China Sea and redirect it into the Tonlé Sap River. By 
October this forces the current to reverse direction, meaning that the river 
flows in one direction for half the year and in the opposite direction for the 
remainder. The unique natural phenomenon is an appropriate metaphor for a 
country of such intense contrasts.

Nothing can prepare you for Angkor Wat. It was here that Tomb Raider was 
recently shot, and the reason is immediately apparent. Hollywood could never 
design a set as breathtaking. Between the 9th and 13th centuries the Khmer 
kings of Angkor ruled far into Thailand, Laos and Vietnam. This immensely 
powerful empire was responsible for forging the present day cultures of the 
whole region. The temple complex of Angkor is really a series of ancient 
cities, long overrun by the jungle. One can spend weeks exploring this amazing 
place, but if time is limited then there are a number of accepted highlights. 
Angkor Wat itself is best seen at dawn.

The sun comes up behind the temple and the light falls on the enormous arena 
before it. The sight is breathtaking; it is difficult to conceive of a clearer 
visual statement of the fact that you are standing at the heart of a great 
empire. Built by Suryavarman II to honour Vishnu, it is enormous, exquisite and 
complex. Secondly, Ta Phrom, built in the 17th century, gives some idea of the 
state the whole complex was in the 1860s when the French rediscovered it. Vines 
and creepers grow through the stone; the jungle and the temple become more 
closely entwined with each passing century. Finally, there is the mystical 
Bayon, built by Jayavarman VII. This asymmetric pile in the middle of Angor 
Thom features huge bas-reliefs of giant faces, all wearing mystically smug 
expressions. It is hypnotic and surreal.

I decided to leave Cambodia by road. It takes two days to get to the border at 
Poipet on one of the worst roads in the world. Immediately I am plunged back 
into the reality of Cambodia's recent past. The bridges have been destroyed and 
rebuilt many times. Occasionally we pass clusters of signs saying 'Danger! 
Mines!'. In ten years this will be a highway built with foreign money, and 
tourism in Cambodia will be a hundred times easier. The future is bright, but 
the present has something to offer. It is not always cheerful, but it is an 
undoctored record of history in the making.

Useful tips

For travel information, the best place to go is the Capitol Guest House. For 
listings you can pick up a free copy of the Bayon Pearnik or The Phnom Penh 
Visitors Guide, both of which are published monthly. Most of the guidebooks to 
Cambodia are poorly researched and out of date, with the exception of the 
Cambodia Guide published byAsia Horizons <http://www.asiahorizons.com>

Getting there

Fly to Bangkok and buying your ticket to Phnom Penh from there. You can now 
also go overland from Thailand via the border crossing at Poipet or via boat 
from Trat to Koh Kong. It will take a couple of days from Bangkok.

 Visas are obtainable at the airport or on the border. It costs US$20 for a 
tourist visa and US$25 for a business visa.

Getting Round

The best, though not the most soothing, way to get around town is by moto 
taxi. These are everywhere - if you see a man in a baseball cap on a moped, he 
will be a moto driver. Be warned: they rarely speak English. Sort out your 
destination in advance to avoid confusion. It costs about 1000 riel to go 
anyway in town during the day, and double at night. You can also pay a driver 
by the hour (the rate is generally about a dollar).

 If you have the time, you can travel by cyclo: bicycle-powered rickshaws. 

 Get to Siem Reap on the fast boat. It is easy to book at a travel agent, 
costs US$25 and leaves at 6am. Buses are frequent to Sihanoukville on the 
country's only good road. Elsewhere, prepare for a bumpy ride in a pickup with 
reinforced suspension.

Staying there

Phnom Penh has a huge variety of reasonably priced hotels. Try The Golden Gate 
(6, Street 278. Tel: 721 161. Fax: 427 618), in the US$10 - US$25 bracket.

Culture and shopping

Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum (S21). Corner of Street 113 and Street 350.
 Choeung Ek Memorial (The Killing Fields). 15km south of Phnom Penh. Ask a 
moto driver.
 Russian Market (Psah Toul Tom Poung). Corner of Street 155 and Street 444.
 National Museum. Street 178 and Street 13.


Restaurants

Capitol Guest House. 14 Street 182. Tel: 724 104. FCCC. 363 Siseowath Quay. 
Tel: 724 014 Happy Herb's.
 The Pink Elephant. 343 Siseowath Quay.
 Heart of Darkness. 26 Street 51.
 Manhattan's. Street 84.
 Martini's. 402 Mao Tse Tung Boulevard.
 The Walkabout. Corner of Streets 174 and 51.
 