
"This autobiography will not make him shine in the lumber room of history," 
observed Cal McCrystal in the Independent on Sunday of Bill Clinton's My Life. 
"Great ramblings about dinners, meetings, journeys and huggings agglutinate the 
957 pages." "It isn't just that it's badly written," objected Anne Applebaum in 
the Sunday Telegraph, "it is hard to glean anything like a 'big idea' from the 
mass of detail... one is left in the end with nothing other than an emotional 
reaction to the man himself." Robert McCrum in the Observer warned that "few of 
Clinton's extraordinary rhetorical gifts translate to the colder medium of the 
printed page. It is emphatically not a joy to read."

As Tim Adams explained in the Observer, Alex Garland's The Coma "describes the 
dream-like interior life of a man left permanently semi-conscious after being 
beaten up on a train... As his protagonist realises that he is only dreaming 
about recovery from his assault, he questions where his thinking self is 
located. The result is compelling and chilling." But Douglas Kennedy in the 
Times asked: "Does it add up to anything more than atmosphere, penumbras and 
the occasional existential aside about life-as-an-ongoing-dream? Possibly not. 
But as a spectral story... it is a strange, compelling ride into that realm 
where nothing is what it seems." Andrew Holgate in the Sunday Times was less 
impressed: "Garland seems to have stripped down and reassembled his style for 
this novella, but he appears in the process to have sacrificed all spontaneity. 
Compared to the brio of The Beach, The Coma is a sadly hesitant affair."

Andy McSmith in the Independent on Sunday found Anthony Seldon's Blair "light 
on policy, light on the broad social picture [and] very dependent on anonymous 
sources". George Walden in the Sunday Telegraph dismissed it as a "Big Mac 
biography" and pointed out "sonorous banalities by the bucket-load... What was 
needed was a book... which discussed not just Blair and his pals, but Blair and 
Britain." "Slowly he nibbles towards the conclusion that Blair has squandered 
the chance to be a radical prime minister," observed Quentin Letts in the 
Telegraph. He actually welcomed the appearance of Derry Irvine in the narrative 
as "one of the few figures in the Blair story not to smell faintly of 
toothpaste".
 