
Clink, clink. Pop. That's the sound of corks being pulled and toasts being 
proposed by those who said they would do just that when Ali Dizaei finally got 
his comeuppance. They are likely to be triumphant – more so than they would 
ever have expected. Not only is the former Metropolitan police commander 
disgraced,having been convicted of perverting the course of justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/09/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-police>
, he got four years. Four years! Two in jail, two on licence.

The language has been harsh and justified, given his conviction by a jury of 
peers. The IPCC said Dizaei was a "criminal in a uniform".

It was hard not to sense vindication in the tone of the Met's former assistant 
commissioner Andy Hayman, who condemned his former colleague even before 
sentence as a "disgrace". Today Met commissioner Sir Paul Stephenson agreed.

But then, on top of everything that emerged at Southwark crown court, Dizaei 
and some of the powers that behad "previous" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/oct/31/race.ukcrime>, as old-style coppers 
used to say.

Was the four-year sentence excessive, as some have said? Soon we will know, 
for if anything is certain, even now Dizaei, a trained lawyer and a man who 
never gives up, right or wrong, will be planning to appeal against it. If there 
are even the smallest legal grounds to challenge the conviction itself, he'll 
do that too.

But surely, there was an inevitability about the sentence upon conviction. The 
law is played for high stakes. Had the jury taken the view that he was 
innocent, the stories today would have been about the Met's hounding of a 
senior minority officer who was a thorn in its side.

Having heard the evidence, however, the jury decided that he had – in no 
particular order – misled his colleagues, fabricating an emergency situation; 
fitted up and assaulted an innocent man to settle a personal score; invented 
evidence; and lied under oath. These are serious transgressions and, whatever 
his supporters say, in the eyes of the law they were proven. In 2001, Lord 
Archer, convicted of perjury, got four years. And Archer wasn't a police 
officer, sworn into office, honour bound to protect and serve.

A sense of euphoria at Scotland Yard might be predictable owing to the fact 
that officials, past and present, know that they have made a mess of the Dizaei 
issue from the outset and see Monday's verdict as a way of claiming redemption. 
They always had doubts about the officer's behaviour and character and yet 
botched Operation Helios, the massively expensive, massively labour-intensive 
investigation that targeted him.

Both Hayman and the previous commissioner, Sir Ian Blair, had starring roles 
in that fiasco. On the evaluation of some, there were elements of the 
investigation that, pursued in a less dramatic way, might have led to a minor 
conviction or, failing that, disciplinary sanction. Either would have meant the 
end for Dizaei in the Met.

But with Helios they opted, at length, for the spectacular. The case became a 
cause célèbre. They got nothing. The result was that an officer many in the 
highest echelons of the Met and the MetPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Authority privately considered unfit 
for the uniform kept his job. And then, because he was smart, knew his rights 
and officially had no stain on his character, that same group of people found 
themselves having to promote him. They blame political correctness, but then 
they always blame political correctness. The truth is that they messed up and, 
for a while, a strategically clever bloke outsmarted them.

So what next? Hard to say, for while it should always be a cause for 
celebration when corruption is uprooted, the case ofAli Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> is clouded by context and history. 
Many minority officers don't feel like celebrating because they still face an 
uphill battle to progress their careers in the police force, and whatever they 
thought of Dizaei personally, they saw him as someone with nerve enough to 
articulate those concerns. With his conviction, they see themselves suffering 
collateral damage.

This morning on Radio 4's Today programme, the Metropolitan Black Police 
Association (MetBPA) was asked whether in the light of Dizaei's conviction it 
should be questioning its own existence. For critics of the MetBPA and those 
tired of activism by the minority staff, the fall of Dizaei is a welcome 
development. Grist to the mill.

But it shouldn't be. For while Dizaei is serving his sentence, the statistical 
reality that minority officers still don't get a fair deal from the Met, and 
that the minority population of London still doesn't get fair treatment from 
the Met continues to require urgent attention.

The Dizaei situation may have been dealt with but the core problem remains.
 