
Dear South African cricket team,

For most of the past five years, you have been the best Test team in the 
world. You have earned that No1 ranking and my unstinting admiration. 
Therefore, I am writing to you to aid you in your noble efforts to shed your 
tag as choke artists extraordinaire.

Now, I can’t help you counteract the Australian bowlers — our pace battery 
consists of the choicest pickings of arguably the finest crop of quicks that 
Australia’s ever produced and our off-spinner, still only 26, is well on track 
to becoming our most successful Test finger-spinner ever.

What I can help you with is one of our key batsmen. Before this series, your 
astute countrywoman, Antoinette Muller, wrote of “Australia’s batting underbelly
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/10/australia-south-africa-cricket-series>
”. That underbelly is still there and, if you play your cards right, you can 
make it look like the sashimi-grade, line-caught southern bluefin tuna that it 
is.

The vulnerable link in the Australian batting line-up that you have, thus far, 
conspicuously failed to target in a remotely competent fashion is the No4: 
Shaun Marsh. He’s the last man protecting our captain and best batsman, Michael 
Clarke. Now, I’m a Clarke believer and always will be.I backed him 
<http://astraightbat.wordpress.com/2011/08/07/a-pup-theory/> even when national 
opinion polls said that he was one of the most unpopular Australian cricketers 
in living memory. The man is class. But, if he has a minor weakness, it’s 
against the new ball, which is why he has enjoyed so much success batting at 
five.

In order to get Clarke in early against the new ball, you’ll have to remove 
Marsh quickly – something that you failed to do in the first Test where Marsh 
comfortably scored a cumulative total of 192 runs against you.

How you contrived to fail to do that is utterly beyond me. 

Marsh is 30-years-old. Before the Centurion Test, in a first-class career 
spanning nearly 13 years, he’d only managed eight first-class hundreds and his 
career first-class average stood at 35.02. He’d been averaging 24 in 
first-class cricket since September 2012. He onceaveraged 2.83 in a four Test 
home series 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/records/averages/batting_bowling_by_team.html?id=6636;team=2;type=series>
 against quite possibly the worst Test bowling attack ever to reach Australian 
shores. On Australia A’s tour of South Africa six months ago, he averaged 13.25 
in two first-class matches against South Africa A. A batsman doesn’t compile a 
record as consistently mediocre as that unless he has some serious deficiencies 
in his game. Let me clue you in on a few of them.

Marsh stands “as still as a Gelug monk in a state of nirvana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a-straight-bat-cricket-blog/2013/oct/25/shaun-marsh-the-special-one>
” until the moment that the ball reaches him. This is an aesthetic virtue, but 
it has two negative technical consequences.

Firstly, without a trigger movement, Marsh’s feet frequently resemble a pair 
of bridge pylons early in his innings. This, as you saw when you finally got 
him out in both innings of the Centurion Test, predisposes him to nick balls of 
a good length, or a touch shorter, between the off and fifth stumps. That is 
precisely how your quicks should bowl to him all the time. If you consistently 
bowl that line-and-length to him, then it is likely that, as AB de Villiers 
pointed out,he’ll glove or nick it like he did in his first innings at Centurion
 
<http://www.theage.com.au/sport/cricket/ab-de-villiers-says-proteas-must-choke-down-fear-to-combat-mitchell-johnson-20140215-32sun.html>
. Therefore, it is imperative that you populate the slips, gully and point 
regions with your best catchers. You may wish to consider stationing someone 
other than a career bat-pad at the key position of gully.

Secondly, early in his innings, Marsh presents the bowler with “a front pad 
that is the approximate size of a Nimitz-class aircraft carrier. In modern 
Australian cricket terminology, a front pad of such size is referred to simply 
as a Watson. <http://astraightbat.wordpress.com/2014/02/12/a-darwinian-world/>” 
This means that, early in his innings, a good change-up for your fast bowlers 
from the default ball set out in the preceding paragraph is a fullish inswinger 
– ideally a yorker — that starts on, or just outside off, and hits Marsh on his 
pads somewhere between middle and off. However, be warned: this delivery is 
only effective as a change-up early in Marsh’s innings; once he gets in, he’s 
actually rather good off his pads.

Marsh has his strengths too. Like all sons of the hard, sun-baked Western 
Australian soil, he’s extremely strong square of the wicket. Do not bowl him 
anything short and wide — he’ll cut you for four. He’s also a strong puller of 
the ball, therefore, generally refrain from bowling him bouncers. That being 
said, he has a long history of back, hamstring and calf problems and, like 
pretty much every batsman in history, he is vulnerable to the perfect throat 
ball. Therefore, bowl him the odd bouncer, especially when he’s new to the 
crease, but make sure that it’s a good one directed at his throat.

Marsh may have a consistently inconsistent first-class, Test and ODI record, 
but he has built one of the best T20 records of any opening bat in history. As 
such, he devours solid limited-overs finger spinners for breakfast on his way 
home from the pub. Therefore, do NOT – like you did in the second innings at 
Centurion – bowl Robin Peterson at him early in his innings.

Come to think of it, don’t bowl Peterson at Marsh or any of the Australian 
batsmen at all. With the notable exceptions of Clarke and Steve Smith, all the 
Australian batsmen have problems starting against world-class spin. But I’m 
sorry to tell you that Robin Peterson is not a world-class spinner. He’s a 
normally solid limited-overs finger-spinner who, based on his performance at 
Centurion, appears to have lost his primary attribute as a bowler – his 
control. Given that, on current form, Duminy’s finger-spin is no worse than 
Peterson’s, you might as well deploy Duminy as your spinner in Port Elizabeth 
and drop Peterson for an extra specialist batsman – you’re going to need him.

With that advice, it’s unlikely that Marsh will get in. If he does, don’t 
panic. It willlook as if Seal Team 6 couldn’t dislodge him from the crease. But 
Marsh, as his record proves and you saw with your own eyes in the first-innings 
at Centurion, has the occasional brain fade even when he’s set. In general, 
it’s best to just keep boring away at him with balls of a good length, or a 
touch shorter, between the off and fifth stumps. However, if he gets in, you 
may wish to give him the odd short ball to pull or cut in the air. He may well 
hit it to a fielder like he did in the first-innings at Centurion. Don’t drop 
it.

You may be wondering why an Australian is writing to you in order to 
ostensibly help you. Fear not – this is not some cunning Australian plan, it is 
simply a happy scenario where the long-term interests of Australian cricket and 
the short-term interests of South African cricket neatly align. If Marsh is 
indeed the Test batting saviour that the Australian selectors believe him to be 
then we need to conclusively determine that as soon as possible and the only 
way to do so is test him to the very limit of his ability in the Test arena. I 
am writing to you to ensure that you do that. If Marsh turns out not to be 
Australia’s Test batting saviour, then, in light of his age andthe alarming 
signal broadcast by his selection 
<http://astraightbat.wordpress.com/2014/02/12/a-darwinian-world/>, it is in the 
long-term interests of Australian cricket that he be dropped as soon as 
possible.

Good luck in Port Elizabeth. And don’t forget your titanium boxes, Mitch is in 
a bit of form.

Yours sincerely,

SB Tang
 