
4.11pm GMT 

So that's yer lot

So momentum, in this fluctuating (and maddeningly, unjustifiably short) 
series, has swung decisively back towards Australia, who are in an excellent 
position from which to dominate this Test and perhaps claim the series. It was 
always going to be a very important toss to win, on a demanding surface to bowl 
on, but Australia’s performance has been near flawless. Warner’s controlled 
excellence set the tone, but the way Clarke toughed out the afternoon 
bombardment from Morkel may well be seen as the decisive aspect of this match. 
And if Steyn does not return, it’s hard - nay impossible – to see South Africa 
winning this.


Before I go, Robert Wilson would like to defend his reputation from my sly 
barbs: “Ignoble schmignoble. You put all those together and I clearly have the 
face of Thomas Brolin and the soul of someone sweetly unwilling to disappoint. 
This has been fabulous cricket. I love it when Australia are grindingly 
brilliant. Makes the world seem young again.”

And on that bombshell, I’ll sign off. Thanks for all your emails and 
anecdotes. Bye.


4.02pm GMT 

88th over: Australia 331-3 (Clarke 92, Smith 50)

Last over of what has become an almost ideal day for Australia. Clarke opens 
the face and drives Philander square to the boundary, but the bowler comes back 
at him with a snorter that beats him through the corridor of uncertainty. 
Clarke, still in a bit of pain, plays out the over and that’s stumps.


3.57pm GMT 

87th over: Australia 327-3 (Clarke 88, Smith 50)

Runs, hits, action. Morkel goes at Clarke from around the wicket, as he did 
before tea, and troubles the captain with a shorter one, rapping his thumb as 
he edges downwards towards second slip. The tourists’ captain is in a bit of 
pain here and needs treatment. But Clarke soldiers on, and reaps a fortuitous 
five as a rash rushed single induces a run-out attempt - and four overthrows, 
such has been the home side’s day. Then Smith reaches 50, with an expertly 
guided upper-cut over the slips for four from a short-pitched ball.


On the subject of autographs, a slightly ignoble confession from Robert 
Wilson: “It’s turning it around a little but I once signed a dozen autographs 
for small boys who thought I was a member of the Swedish national football 
team. Not as stupid as it seems as I was sitting beside the Swedish National 
football team in a departure lounge. I also signed as Tom Hanks in Paris and 
Ralph Fiennes on Belfast New Year’s Eve. So there’s clearly something about 
me.” That “something” being the caddish instincts of a conman, presumably.


3.49pm GMT 

86th over: Australia 318-3 (Clarke 83, Smith 46)

So, can Clarke get his hundred before the close? Can smith reach 50? Australia 
ease off Philander a bit in this over, which is a bit more controlled than his 
first of this spell. And it’s that rarest of things - a maiden.


3.45pm GMT 

85th over: Australia 318-3 (Clarke 83, Smith 46)

More runs. Clarke swivel-pulls Morkel through the onside for an emphatic four, 
and cracks another boundary, punishing a short and wide ball on the offide - 
he’s winning this battle with the bowler now. But he then offers a chance, 
pulling Morkel high towards deep square leg, but the fielder, Philander I 
think, can’t quite scramble round to take it.


Meanwhile, here’s more from James Steenforth’s trade-mag memoirs: ”I also 
worked on a car industry trade mag in the late 90s in Dublin when the boss of 
Fiat Ireland organised an exhibition of vintage Ferrari and Alfa Romeo cars. He 
flew Michael Schumacher out for a press conference, at which Schu spoke 
eloquently for 15 minutes about the history of Italian automotive engineering 
and answered all of my questions without me having to ask them. This was on a 
day that the bus drivers’ union called a strike, so traffic was gridlocked. Not 
for Schu, though. He was escorted back to the airport by four Garda outriders 
and two Pandas bringing up the rear. As we all watched in awe as his entourage 
cut a swathe through the gridlock, two English tourists were overheard 
discussing the sight, one sardonically opining that the well-dressed bloke in 
the back seat of the Alfa must be the Irish minister for transport.”

3.40pm GMT 

84th over: Australia 308-3 (Clarke 73, Smith 46)

Expensive. Philander returns, finds swing with his first delivery, but it’s 
wide and over-pitched, and Smith stretches at it and it squirts square for 
four. And Smith gets lucky with the next one too, edging a good delivery past 
the slips for four more. But the genuinely poorest ball of the over, a limp 
half-volley is clipped authoritatively through mid-on for another boundary.


The movement out there will encourage the bowler; the lack of good fortune 
will not.


3.36pm GMT 

83rd over: Australia 296-3 (Clarke 73, Smith 34)

Second new ball taken, as we go into that extra half-hour. And it’s tossed, 
obviously, to Morne Morkel, who gets a go at Clarke first up. He finds some 
conventional away swing with his second ball, which Clarke leaves. An attempted 
square cut bounces to slip, before Clarke moves away from a short one outside 
off-stump. The only scoring shot comes off the last ball, Clarke pushing Morkel 
past mid-on for two.


3.30pm GMT 

82nd over: Australia 294-3 (Clarke 71, Smith 34)

And it’s still Elgar at the other end too. I’m not sure I can see the point of 
this, though Morkel is limbering up on the boundary. Clarke gets one single, 
but he’s got his feet up and a nice single malt on the go now, so unruffled 
does he look. We’ll be going through for another half an hour tonight.


3.27pm GMT 

81st over: Australia 293-3 (Clarke 70, Smith 34)

No new ball yet. It’s still Duminy, who keeps it tightish, conceding three 
singles.


Disappointing absence of recent emails from people who’ve interviewed former 
Aussie skippers for trade mags in recent overs. Up your game, people.


3.25pm GMT 

80th over: Australia 290-3 (Clarke 68, Smith 33)

Elgar bowls the last over before the second new ball becomes available. De 
Villiers bravely attempts a stumping after Smith hashes up a sweep, but the 
batsman’s feet stay grounded. He gets two more before the end of the over.


3.22pm GMT 

79th over: Australia 288-3 (Clarke 68, Smith 31)

“Pretty girls, lively boys,” trills Mark Nicholas over crowd footage, 
Accidental-Partridge style, as Duminy returns to the attack, round the wicket. 
Smith takes a single on the offside, the only scoring shot from the over.


3.19pm GMT 

78th over: Australia 287-3 (Clarke 68, Smith 30)

Singles for both batsmen off the part-time spinner Elgar, as the strike is 
comfortably rotated and home angst about Steyn’s absence - will it be for the 
whole Test? - mounts.


3.17pm GMT 

77th over: Australia 283-3 (Clarke 65, Smith 28)

Abbott is still plugging away, and not doing much wrong, but finding no real 
help from the pitch, which certainly offers little movement for seamers. He 
manages to keep Smith on the defensive though, which is something as the Aussie 
No5 is beginning to look in decent touch. Sky ahve to do the ‘apologies for the 
nasty swearing’ thing, as the stump mic picks up some industrial language from 
the rattled home players.


3.13pm GMT 

76th over: Australia 283-3 (Clarke 65, Smith 28)

Easy for Australia at the moment. Elgar continues, and South Africa now have 
two odd short-ish mid-off fielders in place. Neither of them bother Smith 
though, who clobbers the spinner over his and everyone else’s head for a 
straight six. He gets another one to complete another expensive over.


3.10pm GMT 

75th over: Australia 275-3 (Clarke 65, Smith 21)

Abbott continues, dropping short on a couple of occasions, the second of which 
brings Clarke a single down to fine leg. Then Smith plays his best shot so far, 
a sumptuously timed clip through midwicket for four. Lovely stuff.


Some commentary box chat about how well Warner was received by the home crowd 
- whether that’s an implied comparison with the knockabout pantomime villain 
treatment to which English crowds subject him is not clear.


3.04pm GMT 

74th over: Australia 269-3 (Clarke 64, Smith 17)

There are singles apiece for Smith and Clarke off Elgar, and the former then 
sweeps neatly down to fine leg. They’re just taking easy ones and twos now.


3.01pm GMT 

73rd over: Australia 263-3 (Clarke 61, Smith 14)

Smith takes a comfortable two off the first ball of Abbott’s over but nothing 
more. Another neat, purposeful over, but SA needs some inspiration from 
somewhere.


Will Georgi has another Essex-related lame-to-fame, about the England batting 
coach: “My brother and I were fortunate enough to witness the latter stages of 
G. Gooch’s 333 at Lords. As impressionable youngsters we hung around after 
hoping to get the big man’s scribble on our scorecards. After waiting for a 
good hour by the changing room doors, the hero of the hour emerged, only to 
deny us with a terse ‘'No.” We were somewhat crushed, but my brother at least 
got his revenge years later at an Essex cricket function. After spying Gooch’s 
hulking figure, he got his pen and paper and strode towards him. GG reached out 
his hands to for the paper, only to be brushed off in favour of Ipswich Town’s 
legendary free kick specialist Mark Venus instead.”

Updated at 3.04pm GMT

2.57pm GMT 

72nd over: Australia 261-3 (Clarke 60, Smith 13)

Elgar continues. Clarke cracks a wide ball backward of square for three. Smith 
and Clarke then take it in turns to push him down the ground for singles after 
the bowler tosses it up a bit more. Batting is looking pretty easy out there at 
the moment. A bit of the tension draining away here.


2.54pm GMT 

71st over: Australia 256-3 (Clarke 56, Smith 12)

Abbott replaces Morkel, who presumably needs a bit of a breather before the 
second new ball. He finds a decent line and length, and some good variation, 
and Smith is respectfully defensive. Possibly the tidiest over since tea.


2.49pm GMT 

70th over: Australia 256-3 (Clarke 56, Smith 12)

Elgar returns to the attack, Clarke and Smith milk him for singles. An 
unthreatening run-up to the drinks break.


I, for one, am interested in James Steenforth’s air conditioner trade mag tale 
(having once done subbing shifts on Heating and Ventilation News), and here he 
offers more insights into the reporter’s craft with a more detailed account of 
his Mark Taylor interview: “I got drunk on the cheap plonk on offer and just 
rewrote the press release. I did, however, write a fine piece on another 
manufacturer’s product range following an invitation to attend a charity golf 
day at which the tombola was presided over by none other than Len Pascoe.” 
Budding journalists please note, it’s not just about glamour, this trade.

2.44pm GMT 

69th over: Australia 252-3 (Clarke 54, Smith 10)

Morkel beats Smith for pace and has half a shout for lbw, but it’s too high. 
He’s still toiling away, but is finding no joy.


South Africa’s lack of a top-notch spinner is hurting them here. But then 
we’re back in a bit of a lean era for international spinners in general again 
aren’t we? Even Saeed Ajmal has lost a bit of form lately.


2.40pm GMT 

67th over: Australia 252-3 (Clarke 54, Smith 10)

50 for Clarke, a fine effort from someone who hasn’t scored that heavily 
recently despite never really looking out of form. He dances forward and cracks 
Duminy wide of mid-off for a boundary, which takes him to 49, then clips the 
next ball square on the leg side to bring up his half-century. Smith adds 
another single, Clarke cracks another to deep extra cover for two, and then 
gets two more off the last ball of the over. Runs flowing freely again now.


2.35pm GMT 

66th over: Australia 242-3 (Clarke 45, Smith 9)

What would South Africa do for a rampant, reverse-swinging Steyn in this 
evening light? Morkel continues to lead the attack in his stead, but is 
beginning to look a tad on the knackered side. Smith, perhaps, senses this and 
greets a fuller delivery by unfurling a classy cover drive for four.


2.31pm GMT 

66th over: Australia 238-3 (Clarke 45, Smith 5)

Clarke square cuts Duminy emphatically for four, and he and Smith add another 
single each as Australia’s run rate remains spritely.


“I once asked the then England fast bowler and my namesake David Lawrence for 
his autograph,” writes Dave Lawrence (no relation, obvs), “when I was around 
10-11. He told me to F*** off. He had just been clean bowled for a golden duck 
in a Sunday League match against Hampshire and I caught him as he walked off 
the ground. I guess you could say that my timing wasn’t brilliant, but then 
again, they do say never meet your heroes..” I dunno. I think grumpiness makes 
players more human. We need more unscripted tetchiness in the sanitised, modern 
game.


2.28pm GMT 

65th over: Australia 232-3 (Clarke 40, Smith 4)

Morkel continues to pin Clarke back, Clarke continues to survive. The South 
Africa quick bowler is going over the wicket at him this time, but the 
tourists’ captain is unshiftable. If he’s still in at the end of the day, 
Australia will be in decisive control, you feel. He takes a single past mid-on 
as Morkel loses his radar a touch with legside half-volley. There are then some 
half-yelps of excitement as Smith chops one in the direction of slip, but it’s 
bounced.


2.23pm GMT 

64th over: Australia 229-3 (Clarke 37, Smith 4)

Smith is shuffling his bowlers like a great big shuffly thing, and brings back 
Duminy again. Clarke flicks him off his legs for a single. Smith sees out the 
over.

In better news for SA, they’ve beaten Pakistan to win the U19 World Cup. Well 
done them.


2.20pm GMT 

63rd over: Australia 228-3 (Clarke 36, Smith 4)

Morkel’s back. And bowling at Clarke. He waits until his third delivery to go 
short, sending one whistling past a slashing Clarke outside off stump. He’s 
getting so much more pace and bounce out of this surface than the others. But 
Clarke then gets two through midwicket as the bowler pitches one up - the 
Aussie captain is literally on his back foot, but he’s playing this well, and 
adds another single. Steyn, of course, is still off the field.


2.16pm GMT 

62nd over: Australia 225-3 (Clarke 33, Smith 4)

Smith pushes Philander wide of the diving Duminy at gully for two, it’s the 
only scoring stroke of the over.


“As a reporter on a trade magazine,” relates James Steerforth, “I once had the 
pleasure of interviewing Mark Taylor about his views on the energy efficiency 
of the new inverter technology from a certain manufacturer of air conditioners. 
He preferred to talk about cricket.” How did the piece pan out James? Did you 
disappoint your news editor by not asking the requisite questions about cooling 
technologies as you dissolved into reveries about Headingley 89 and such like?

2.11pm GMT 

61st over: Australia 223-3 (Clarke 33, Smith 2)

Clarke rocks back and delivers a beautiful square cut wide of gully for four. 
He’s wonderful to watch when he plays shots like that. Abbott is bowling 
short-ish, but he’s not got the fire of Morkel.


Meanwhile, Gary Naylor has a serious point to make about the Cape Town crowd, 
which looks substantial and engaged. “Did all these people who insist on 
turning up for Test cricket not get the memo? Test cricket is a dying, 
anachronistic, irrelevance - or so we’re told...” We’re also told that South 
Africa are not one of the three Countries That Matter in the thrusting modern 
international game. But what do we know?


2.07pm GMT 

60th over: Australia 219-3 (Clarke 29, Smith 2)

Duminy, having done his bit, is replaced after one over for Philander, who 
switches ends. He keeps Smith honest, and concedes no run, though the pitch is 
offering little.


2.03pm GMT 

59th over: Australia 219-3 (Clarke 29, Smith 2)

Kyle Abbott comes on in place of Philander, and keeps Clarke pegged on his 
back foot as South Africa look to capitalise on Warner’s wicket. The Australian 
captain is rightly watchful - he’s been excellent, in his own way, considering 
the large fitted kitchen sinks that have been slung at him.


“I saw Mark Butcher at the Champions Trophy Semi-final at the Oval last 
summer,” brags Ryan Skinner. “As I’m too young (21) to have actually watched 
much of Butch beyond rain delay highlights, all I could say to him was ’You’re 
really good in the commentary box, Butch’ He just sort of half smiled an kept 
walking.” I’m sure he’ll be relaying that to the grandchildren in decades to 
come.


1.59pm GMT 

58th over: Australia 219-3 (Clarke 29, Smith 2)

So Duminy replaces Elgar and drops wide and short straight away and Clarke 
chops him down to deep point for one. And then DUMINY SNAGS WARNER, hacking 
slightly outside the off-stump at one that just slightly turns away from him. 
De Villiers takes it, after an initial fumble. Warner thinks about a review but 
Clarke counsels against him and that is that, the end of an excellent 
Test-match innings from the opener.

New batsman Smith almost sacrifices himself too, rashly driving on the up but 
sneaking two.


1.55pm GMT 

Wicket! Warner c De Villiers b Duminy 135, Australia 217-3

Well wouldn’t you know


1.52pm GMT 

57th over: Australia 216-2 (Warner 135, Clarke 28)

Clarke is twice denied runs just backward of square on the offside by good 
stops, and then takes a single down to fine leg as Philander strays slightly in 
an otherwise decent over.


Regarding sporting encounters, John Starbuck writes: “Not quite sure if this 
qualifies, but I always regret that I didn’t speak to Darren Gough outside 
Horbury Library when he was taking photos of his wife and very young baby. I 
could have told him he was shorter than he looked on the telly - but still 
taller than Harold Larwood who barely came up to my shoulder when I met him in 
the 1970s. Sadly, I had somewhere else to be at the time.” The bar’s pretty low 
to be honest, John, so that qualifies.


1.48pm GMT 

56th over: Australia 215-2 (Warner 135, Clarke 27)

Chance! Kind of. Clarke cuts at a wide one from Elgar, and the South African 
captain, at slip, snatches at it, but his reflexes aren’t quite quick enough to 
snaffle it. Clarke gets a single, and Warner responds by belting Elgar over 
long-on for six. Elgar tucks him up a little more successfully with his 
remaining deliveries.


1.45pm GMT 

54th over: Australia 207-2 (Warner 128, Clarke 26)

Warner grabs a quick single to midwicket off Philander, who finds a bit more 
bounce in this over bowling at Clarke, but doesn’t trouble him unduly.


Talking, sort of, about cricketer sightings, I remember, as a kid, being 
absurdly excited that, after produring Graeme Fowler’s autograph at England’s 
then-humiliating draw against Sri Lanka at Lord’s in 1984, the nuggety opening 
batsman actually recognised me the following year when I saw him playing for 
Lancashire against Essex at Ilford. Friends to the stars, me, I thought. We 
made our own entertainment/had our own quainter definitions of fame in those 
days.


1.40pm GMT 

53rd over: Australia 205-2 (Warner 127, Clarke 26)

Warner pulls Elgar to deep square leg for two, and is then denied a boundary 
by a good stop at mid-off. He adds another single with a pull to long-on, which 
puts Clarke on strike, and he does what he does best, next ball, opening up to 
cream Elgar through the covers for four. Seven from the over.


1.36pm GMT 

52nd over: Australia 198-2 (Warner 124, Clarke 22)

Philander resumes, Warner punches him calmly through the covers for two and 
nudges another single through the same area in an over that is otherwise 
accurate but unthreatening. With Steyn still off the pitch, a lot of 
responsibility is on Philander’s shoulders too.


1.29pm GMT 

Welcome back

Good evening/afternoon/middle-of-the-night-in-a-lonely-bar. Well, that little 
bodyline cameo from Morkel at Clarke aside, this has been a hugely enjoyable 
day for Australia so far, and the fact that Michael Clarke has survived the 
barrage thus far will give further satisfaction to the tourists, while David 
Warner has cemented his status as a Proper Test Cricketer with this innings. 
Anyway, South Africa need a couple of wickets at least in this final session. 
Keep those emails, insights and cricketer-spotting lames-to-fame coming.


1.18pm GMT 

51st over: 195-2 (Warner 121 Clarke 22) - and that is tea

Against the odds Michael Clarke has negotiated his way through a genuinely 
ferocious attack from the Proteas, with Morne Morkel roughing him up in 
venomous style. At the other end David Warner has been truly superb in 
compiling his second century of the series, ensuring Australia still hold the 
upper hand at tea.

Before Tom Davies steps in to take you through until stumps, I have another 
crap sports star sightings...Actually no it’s a pretty good one.

The man who helped kicked it all off, Robert Wilson, has this recollection and 
the final word: “1993. The touchline of some municipal football pitches. Kenny 
Dalglish. My line? The imperishable classic ‘Is it really you?’. Not a man of 
much whimsy, the great Kenny. You should haveseen his face. It still wakes me 
some nights.”

Thanks to all of you for your company and successfully distracting me from 
this gripping Test match. Au revoir.

1.11pm GMT 

50th over: 194-2 (Warner 120 Clarke 22)

Now Philander appears to replace the tiring Morkel, which probably leaves 
Clarke feeling like the actor in a slasher film who has at least survived the 
first act and has a reasonable chance of making it through to appear in the 
sequel. He celebrates nervously, driving through gully with a slightly lofted 
stroke for four. His main focus here will be surviving until tea, which is an 
over away.

Paul Bourdin has an entry. “I once had to give a safety briefing for a walking 
safari to Ellery Hanley while I was working as a safari guide in Zambia. He was 
a bit tired as he’d been awake all night worrying about the spiders in his 
room.” Suitably niche.

1.06pm GMT 

49th over: 189-2 (Warner 119 Clarke 18)

Tom V D Gucht is back with some pearls. “I’ve never met Smith, yet I did have 
a near miss with England’s next cricketer who cut their teeth playing in the 
continent of Africa. At the end of last summer I spotted Gary Ballance 
loitering outside Nandos in Leeds. I was going to pop out and try to get my 
photo with him, but decided not to on the grounds that: A. I would lose my 
place in the line for a table (and you have to wait for an eon in Nandos) B. I 
realised that literally nobody I knew would be impressed....”

How wrong you were, Tom. That’s going in the book buddy. Plus, with a product 
placement like that we might even get a Nando’s endorsement deal. Or just have 
the book launch there. Either way.

Somewhat amazingly the 50 partnership is now up between Warner and Clarke 
after the former thwacks another boundary from Elgar.

1.02pm GMT 

48th over: 183-2 (Warner 114 Clarke 17)

Gary Naylor did more than just sit there. “I stood next to Michael Holding 
waiting for a lift (did so a few times) and simply could not speak at all. Here 
was a man whom I grew up to regard as something that had descended from Mount 
Olympus, a god amongst us mortals. I’ve managed to find words since, but still 
have to push my chin up with my finger every time I see the man.”

I think I’d probably do something embarrassing like tell him I love him or 
accidentally impersonate his voice as I spoke to him. Only hours ago my 
girlfriend and I were talking to each other in Michael Holding’s voice, 
actually. If I ever get a GPS I hope it has his voice. I’d probably just drive 
around the neighbourhood all day.

Meanwhile, Morkel is mainly bowling to Warner in this over so it plays out a 
little less like the running of the bulls. The only thing at risk of being 
gored is the ball as Warner slashes at a cut shot down to the sweeper to pick 
up two, deep on the off-side.

12.57pm GMT 

47th over: 180-2 (Warner 112 Clarke 16)

Warner realises it might be better to make hay from Dean Elgar and is looking 
for a boundary when he thumps a single to deep cover. Clark,e on the other 
hand, realises it’s a fight or flight scenario and he actually has an 
opportunity here to tough it out and do something really special; a gritty 
captain’s knock in the face of severe, unrelenting physical pressure. This is 
what Test cricket is about.

12.54pm GMT 

46th over: 178-2 (Warner 111 Clarke 15)

Morkel’s not done here and resumes service with the Cape Town crowd beginning 
to smell blood. After Warner and Clarke both nudge singles for some respite, 
Warner hooks aggressively but not with total control to pick up a boundary. 
Clarke defends with more authority to finish the over.

Robert Wilson is adding a bit of mayo to his Malcolm Marshall story now. 
“Forget about the advance. That’s the 90’s talking. Stick it to them on the 
merchandising, the figurines, the playstation games. I should have pointed out 
that I walked past Marshall at five in the morningduring a Test Match. Now, 
that’s charisma.”

12.49pm GMT 

45th over: 169-2 (Warner 105 Clarke 14)

Elgar’s over of gentle spin is like the sight of a Chihuahua sitting on the 
drivers seat of a monster truck in comparison with Morkel’s bruising encounter 
with Clarke. I’m still in shock myself to be honest and there are legitimate 
concerns for the safety of the Aussie skipper. Concussion is a real threat 
here, you would think.

12.47pm GMT 

45th over: 167-2 (Warner 104 Clarke 13)

This is getting ugly. Clarke’s cops another blow in the side of the head now 
and hits the deck after Morkel’s bouncer gets a deflection from his shoulder 
and then cannons into the side of the batsman’s face, just under the face guard.

Clarke ducked straight into that and again his eyes were nowhere near the 
ball. That is going to need to change if he’s going to do more than survive and 
get hit. The follow-up after a brieff interlude for treatment is another 
cracker, rapping Clark on the gloves and nearly bobbing over his head and onto 
the stumps. It’s a fearsome assault on the Australian captain by Morkel and a 
quite thrilling encounter.

The final delivery screams past Clarke’s nose and I’m not overstating it to 
say that that was the most dramatic over of the series, even more dangerous 
than what Mitchell Johnson unleashed at Centurion.

12.40pm GMT 

44th over: 166-2 (Warner 103 Clarke 13)

JOHN STARBUCK is just egging me on now. “Forget the autobiography. Your best 
bet is to gather a few hundred accidental sporting encounters from readers and 
publish them as they stand.Plenty of others have made money this way so there’s 
obviously a market for ‘I once sat next to Robin Smith’. Robin Smith might want 
a cut, though - hang on, if anyone is not in need of a cut, it’s Robin Smith.”

This is brilliant. Readers, please write in with more. All of this has just 
made me remember the time a bloke called into Melbourne sports radio talkback 
to say he’d seen Australia’s NFL punting superstar Saverio Rocca eating a full 
roast chicken (“with no sides” - he really emphasized that) all by himself in a 
Red Rooster store.

Okay, the book will be called “I once sat next to Robin Smith in a train.” 
Publishers, hit me on the email address above once we’ve had a few more 
submissions

By the way, Clarke is in serious pain out there. He’s called for an arm guard 
but the horse has well and truly bolted there.

12.35pm GMT 

43rd over: 162-2 (Warner 102 Clarke 10)

What is abundantly clear is that the Proteas feel they’ll get Clarke with the 
short ball, which Morkel dutifully delivers. There is a leg slip, a short leg 
and further catchers waiting as the Aussie skipper ducks in an ugly fashion to 
be struck in the forearm. The disturbing part of that particular delivery was 
that he’d taken his eyes off it so far in advance of its arrival that he didn’t 
realise how low the bounce actually was. The resultant bruise is nasty and you 
have to wonder what other damage lurks below the surface.

Only 42 runs have come from the last 17 overs and the Proteas are restricting 
the scoring well when they’re not bowling to Warner. Amazingly, he is still 
operating near a run-a-ball.

12.29pm GMT 

42nd over: 160-2 (Warner 101 Clarke 9)

With Steyn off the ground and receiving treatment, Dean Elgar limbers up to 
take the ball. His first delivery of left-arm orthodox spin takes so long to 
get to Warner that might have gone off and had another drink before he had to 
play his shot.

Such are Clarke’s struggles at the moment that he’s almost caught behind from 
a loose cut shot, which featured the kind of shambolic footwork you’d expect of 
a tailender. At the end of the over he calls for a new set of gloves but he 
might be better off asking for glasses.

12.25pm GMT 

41st over: 158-2 (Warner 100 Clarke 8)

Steyn continues to Clarke and he has a quite unusual deep, backward short leg. 
He brusts in for one delivery before shocking the crowd to silence by limping 
off the ground and going straight into the pavilion for treatment. That could 
be a major development if the injury is serious.

Morne Morkel steps up to the plate to finish the over and has Clarke ducking 
under a very brisk bumper and later hits him in the midriff with another, which 
lodges between Clarke’s elbow and hib on the way down. .

Robert Wilson thinks my autobiography could be a real page-turner and asks, 
“Have you lost your mind? I once sat next to Robin Smith is enough for an epic 
trilogy, beginning, middle and end. It’s enough for a seven hour Soviet-era 
cinematic spectacular. I myself once walked past Malcom Marshall at five 
o’clock in the morning on the Seven Sisters Road and the thought can still make 
me hot and trembly.”

It gets better; once I sat in the next barber’s chair along from Gus Logie and 
ACTUALLY TALKED TO HIM. I was 11 years old at the time and actually slightly 
taller than Gus to be honest. Is this good material, Robert? What sort of 
advance could I get based on these teasers?

12.19pm GMT 

40th over: 158-2 (Warner 100 Clarke 8)

Phil Withall is not happy about the alter ego I have given him. “Just wanted 
to clarify that I’m not Paul Withall. Getting my name in the OBO is the only 
way I can impress my kids and justify my tawdry existence,” he says. Oh come on 
Phil, I’m sure they think you’re really cool. I bet it’s all they talk about 
with their friends.

Back at Cape Town, Abbott is steaming in to Warner again and doing his 
damnedest to make something happen by cramping the batsman for room and making 
him earn this potential milestone. Warner can’t be denied though and brings up 
his second century of the series by pulling Abbott for a boundary before 
leaping in the air in jubilation. It came from 104 balls and really has gotten 
Australia off to a flyer.

12.12pm GMT 

39th over: 154-2 (Warner 96 Clarke 8)

Steyn is coming around the wicket to Warner and a leg-side line makes it easy 
for the batsman to tuck a single around the corner to fine leg. Michael Clarke 
isn’t quite as lucky and is surprised to see a short one from Steyn keep 
noticeably low. Maybe this isn’t such a road after all.

With that, the players take drinks and so might I while I still can. 

12.08pm GMT 

NOT OUT!

It’s missed the bat by a decent margin so the Proteas have burnt a review and 
Warner lives to fight another day.

12.07pm GMT 

REVIEW!

Steyn thinks he has Warner caught behind down the leg side but it looks more 
like pad to me.

12.06pm GMT 

38th over: 153-2 (Warner 95 Clarke 8)

Abbott keeps slamming it in but he’s not getting much love from the surface so 
all he has to show for his effort is bead upon bead of sweat running down his 
grimacing face. A single to Warner edges him within 5 of a century.

Updated at 12.08pm GMT

12.05pm GMT 

37th over: 152-2 (Warner 94 Clarke 8)

Simon McMahon says, “Morning Russell. If I may say so, the actual clip on 
which Partridge gets lucky is based is even better, as he plays air bass to 
Music for Chameleons by Gary Numan. The bit where he ‘removes’ the invisible 
guitar when the door goes is priceless. A bit like David Warner at the moment 
it seems.” I know, it combines two genuinely great things; Partridge and Numan.

I liked Gary Numan so much when I was a teenager that I actually bought a $15 
magazine about synthesizers just because he was on the cover. The contents were 
obviously impenetrable save for a few stories about groupies really digging 
synths, which even raised eyebrows of cynicism in this Numan fanboy. I think 
the magazine was called “The Future of Music”, the irony of which appeared 
completely lost on the publisher. Running a feature on Gary Numan in the late 
90s surely didn’t feel like the future.

11.58am GMT 

36th over: 149-2 (Warner 92 Clarke 7)

Abbott now appears to relieve Philander of his duties and bowls a tidy over, 
only conceding a single to Warner.

Gary Naylor also has some thoughts about David Warner and they’re actually 
quite complimentary. “While Davey Warner is obviously much like Sanath 
Jayasuriya both in style of play and in unorthodox rise to the opener’s slot in 
Test cricket, he also reminds me of one of England fans’ favourite players. The 
forearms, the slashing cuts, the no backward step ever approach - Warner is the 
Robin Smith of this decade. And, for South African and Australian readers, I 
can promise you that praise does not come higher from an England supporter of a 
certain age.”

That was going to prompt me to tell my Robin Smith anecdote but then I 
realised that the entire story from start to finish is, “I once sat next to 
Robin Smith on a train.” I really should save this brilliant material for my 
autobiography, shouldn’t I?

11.53am GMT 

35th over: 148-2 (Warner 91 Clarke 7)

As Steyn hands his cap to Umpire Dharmasena and trots back to his marker, 
thoughts are beginning to turn to David Warner’s impending milestone. Here he 
manages a single, bringing Clarke on strike to a man who’s heading into nemesis 
territory, such is his success against the Australian captain. There are two 
slips in place but Clarke negotiates his first couple of sighters well.

Paul Withall has worked through his Warner feelings and says, “I’ve finally 
worked out my relationship with David Warner. He is the step dad I never had. 
Constantly embarrassing me with his bad behaviour and poor social skills, being 
a little “try hard” in the cool stakes but then doing something so cool you 
have to, rather grudgingly, respect the man. Mind you he’s still not going to 
make me love him.”

11.48am GMT 

34th over: 147-2 (Warner 90 Clarke 7)

Taking his first look at Philander, Clarke is forward and running one off the 
face of the bat for a boundary to third man. Still, I can’t imagine Dale Steyn 
will be far away.
Daniel Brettig (@danbrettig) 
Spin first-up to Clarke. Will get his feet and rhythm going. #SAvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/danbrettig/statuses/439726907450732545> March 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/danbrettig/statuses/439726907450732545> 
11.42am GMT 

33rd over: 143-2 (Warner 90 Clarke 3)

I’m wrong, actually. Steyn had been off the ground resting up for some time 
before he took this catch so the umpires move in to kibosh his attempt to 
immediately return to the attack. It’s fair enough really. Only moments ago he 
was resting up on the sidelines and chatting to Proteas bowling coach Allan 
Donald.

Captain Clarke is off the mark with two through cover and this shapes as an 
important innings for him. He’s had a lean trot since a brace of centuries to 
start the home Ashes, scoring only 139 runs at 17.38 in the 5 Tests since.

11.38am GMT 

32nd over: 139-2 (Warner 89 Clarke 0)

Philander is providing a spark for the Proteas now and follows the Doolan 
wicket by taking some flesh on David Warner’s bicep after the batsman ducked 
away from a short one. It looks like Dale Steyn will now return to partner the 
umber one bowler in the world.

11.35am GMT 

WICKET! c Steyn b Philander 20 (Australia 138-2)

Doolan is out of his misery, moving back awkwardly to a short one from 
Philander and swivel-pulling an ugly stroke into the air to be caught at 
mid-on. He’ll be disappointed with that innings and his difficulties seemed 
amplified by the ease with which his partner was playing.

11.32am GMT 

31st over: 138-1 (Warner 88 Doolan 20)

Warner takes advantage of the even bounce in this wicket by attractively 
guiding Abbott down towards third man for two, which is probably he best course 
of action right now. He’s added patience to his armory, it would appear. Better 
still is an angled drive behind point, which hits the bat sweetly as both of 
Warner’s feet are off the ground. He follows it with a more conventional drive 
through the cover region, a boundary that edges him close to the 90s.

Updated at 11.36am GMT

11.27am GMT 

30th over: 126-1 (Warner 77 Doolan 19)

The energetic and focused Warner springs immediately into action facing 
Philander and chips through the leg side for one but his initiative doesn’t 
prove contagious for his partner, who has 15 runs from his first 60 deliveries. 
Finally Doolan drives Philander wide of mid-wicket for a boundary but he’ll 
also need to find a way to turn the strike if he’s to help maintain Australia’s 
momentum.

11.23am GMT 

29th over: 121-1 (Warner 76 Doolan 15)

Abbott has the ball tailing in to Doolan and one that’s middled into the 
batsman’s pad draws a loud and frankly absurd appeal from Proteas skipper 
Graeme Smith, whose teammates are unmoved by the theatrics. Doolan does the 
right thing by his partner (well, sort of) and gives him some strike by playing 
out a maiden.

11.19am GMT 

28th over: 121-1 (Warner 76 Doolan 15)

Vernon Philander is the man to partner Abbott and boasts a quite remarkable 
Test bowling average at this venue. Most Australians still get cold sweats 
thinking about his efforts in Cape Town last time around, when he really tore 
through the Aussies. He starts well after lunch, forcing Doolan into a 
speculative drive and moving it away past the outside edge. Like the over 
preceding, Doolan bunts a single off the last delivery to keep the strike and 
possibly frustrate his partner slightly. The Tasmanian has looked scratchy at 
best today.

11.15am GMT 

27th over: 120-1 (Warner 76 Doolan 14)

The relative newcomer Kyle Abbott gets us away after lunch and while I liked 
the look of him in the first session I don’t think he particularly troubled 
Warner much at all. The latter gets started again with a single to third man 
before Doolan is forced into an emergency “dig” to one that kept low. He’s not 
altogether sure of his footwork right now, Doolan, often caught in two minds 
between coming forward and coming back.

11.08am GMT 

Cricket - it'll cure what ails you

All our best OBO wishes go out to JOHN STARBUCK, who is feeling poorly. “I too 
am stuck in bed on a fine day, but because of illness not indolence,” he says. 
“Dutifully working through (most of) today’s bumper Guardian and very thankful 
to have the OBO as a corrective to all the unpleasant things going on elsewhere 
in the world.Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> - the cure for 
the world’s unhappiness.”

I couldn’t agree any more, JOHN. Get well friend. 

Lize-Marie van der Watt is stranded without coverage and says, “Supporting the 
Saffa boys here from dreary Stockholm, no place to go watch the game in the 
land of innebandy and curling. Trying to explain cricket to my Swedish 
boyfriend. It is bloody tough. Any youtube videos to recommend? I just showed 
him some videos of fast-bowlers to make a point that the cricket is neither 
slow nor peaceful...” Show him the Curtly video and then make sure you leave a 
lamp on when he goes to bed.

Pepp Fitzgerald is feeling lucky, but apparently not in a ‘Partridge gets 
lucky’ kind of way. “like Daft Punk . I’m up all night, Russel, hoping to Get 
Lucky... very nervous and rattled watching Warner.....stay at it, , Davie boy.”

Seriously, no matter how many times I watch Partridge getting lucky I have to 
watch it again. It also kind of works as a theme tune for David Warner I guess.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D46K38QEzY68&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D46K38QEzY68>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D46K38QEzY68&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D46K38QEzY68&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D46K38QEzY68>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D46K38QEzY68&media=>
close  Partridge gets lucky 
10.59am GMT 

You shall know our velocity

No, it’s not Dave Eggars, it’s Tom V D Gucht who says, “Looking at cricinfo’s 
hawk eye bowler speed resource, it’s hard not to be impressed by the variety in 
South Africa’s bowler’s speeds: their average pace seem to increase by two mph 
for each bowler, it gives the graph a cool Tron-like vibe.”

Also, I shouldn’t be surprised by Morne Morkel’s pace but for some reason I 
always am. He’s basically bowling as quick as Johnson but doing so from 6’7” up 
in the air. Can you imagine if he was secretly entered into one of those US 
sports draft combines? His “wingspan” reading would probably cause a meltdown 
at ESPN HQ.

As I say this, Richie Richardson, Curtly Ambrose and Andy Roberts are being 
knighted in Antigua. Curtley is hamming it up by pulling on Bumble’s ears as he 
tries to do the live coverage. It’s the first verified instance of Curtly 
smiling in years.

It’s enough to make you want to watch 71 Curtly Ambrose dismissals, all 
bowled...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgIFGOCGfGY8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgIFGOCGfGY8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgIFGOCGfGY8&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgIFGOCGfGY8&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgIFGOCGfGY8>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgIFGOCGfGY8&media=>
close  Curtly Mania. 
10.48am GMT 

Urgh I think I am enjoying David Warner's form...

Evening all. What is going on? David Warner is backing up his sizeable mouth 
with runs aplenty. Since the start of Australia’s home Ashes series he has 861 
runs at an average of 66.23 and that’s an attractive set of numbers, no matter 
what you think of his antics.

The story of the session for me, as Geoff alluded to earlier, was the way that 
Warner made those pre-lunch runs at such a brisk rate without taking any undue 
risks. I find that chipped pull shot of his particularly compelling. It’s 
completely wrong, really. Really it’s a double-handed backhand with a 
trajectory most commonly seen in a game of seniors tennis. Somehow, totally 
against the odds, it’s effective.

Meanwhile, Andy in Dee Why is loving life. “The Mrs out on the town with the 
girls and was worried about me looking after the kids!” he says. “Oh the 
struggle, in bed hours ago! Channel hopping between the Waratahs spanking the 
Reds, a Bond, Warner looking very comfortable and a dirty great big steak on my 
plate. And I earn brownie points for this, life is good occasionally.”

If any of the rest of you lovely people feel like dropping me a line, 
russell.jackson.casual@theguardian.com is where you will find me.

10.37am GMT 

Oh, and write the man a letter

Russell, that is. He loves mail. Send him a gif or whatever it is people do. 
You can use russell.jackson.casual@theguardian.com.

10.35am GMT 

LUNCH

A brilliant session for Australia, after Michael Clarke was fortunate to win 
the toss on a good batting pitch. Rogers was the only casualty, caught at slip 
for 25 after a dynamic start, but Warner pressed on, taking his lunchtime score 
to 75 from 73 balls without having played a single reckless or ridiculous shot. 
He hasn’t needed to, as South Africa’s bowlers have erred often enough in 
length and line to give him plenty of opportunities. Alex Doolan has started to 
look a bit more at home after a tentative start, after he was the batsman to 
keep his place when Shaun Marsh was dropped. Russell Jackson will take up the 
call after the lunch break, as South Africa do whatever they can to haul the 
contest back their way, and Warner eyes off a second hundred for the series. 
Aaannnd... sandwich.

10.32am GMT 

26th over: 118-1 (Warner 75 Doolan 13)

Warner continues, a big thick edge that squirts square of the gully fieldsman 
for two more runs. He’s done nothing extravagant, causing Patrick Cost-Chretien 
to write in from the fine town of Orange and suggest that Warner is trying to 
rectify the difference between his first-innings and second-innings runs. I’m 
not sure that his 12 and 115 in the first Test really helped that case, but he 
does at least have a couple of first-innings half centuries in the last two 
Tests, and also put on his first 50+ opening stand with Chris Rogers in the 
first innings of a Test. True story.

Warner takes one more single, lifts his score to 75, and that is the end of 
both the over and the session.

Updated at 11.11am GMT

10.27am GMT 

25th over: 115-1 (Warner 72 Doolan 13)

Warner directs Philander past point for a single, and the 50 partnership comes 
up, with Doolan having made just 13 of them. If not a silent partner, at least 
a very discreet one. Which probably makes him a good man to have an affair 
with. File it away. The over only goes for one, but none of South Africa’s five 
bowlers today has gone for less than four an over.

10.23am GMT 

24th over: 114-1 (Warner 71 Doolan 13)

Morne Morkel is so overcome by that Warner poem that he gives Warner a single, 
then lobs a high bouncer over the wicketkeeper and away for five byes.

10.17am GMT 

23rd over: 108-1 (Warner 70 Doolan 13)

Warner drives three more runs wide of mid on, and goes to 70, but I don’t want 
to write anything else, because I don’t want to take focus from this beautiful 
piece of prose poetry from Robert Wilson.

David Warner is ruining my future

A cricket-watching life is dotted with the same repeated dark moments when 
some new face arrives on the scene and provokes an instant allergy in you. You 
can’t stick him at any price. You grind teeth, you punch cushions, you kick 
cats. And a shadow of dread falls upon your heart, as his runs or wickets mount 
and the guy becomes a regular, then prominent and finally ubiquitous. And you 
understand he is going to play fordecades. And the truly unbearable thing is 
that you know, you absolutely know that in the last year of his career, you 
will love him more than you have ever loved any woman or child and you will cry 
real tears when he retires. But why did it have to be David Warner?

10.13am GMT 

22nd over: 105-1 (Warner 67 Doolan 13)

Warner carries on, a leg glance for one run against Steyn. This wicket isn’t 
offering a huge amount for the bowlers, all three batsmen have driven quite 
comfortably throughout their innings. The longer this goes on, the more 
important that toss looks. That importance might all be an illusion though. 
Doolan bats out the over without adding.

10.08am GMT 

21st over: 104-1 (Warner 66 Doolan 13)

There’s Doolan’s first boundary, as he plays a controlled back-foot forcing 
shot from Abbott’s wide delivery through backward point. The next ball provokes 
a vigorous appeal, but there was a huge inside edge directing it onto Doolan’s 
pad. Having got the hang of things, Doolan goes onto the back foot against a 
weak shorter ball that sat up at hip height, and clips it away through square 
for another four. The run rate is still at five an over despite Doolan’s sedate 
start, and the Australian hundred is up.

10.03am GMT 

20th over: 96-1 (Warner 66 Doolan 5)

Steyn still isn’t quite right today. His first this over is a high bouncer 
that is easily avoided, his second is short and pulled for two runs. His third 
is full and wide and Warner gets down on one knee to drive it with an angled 
bat away for four. I’m not sure if they’ve dropped a sweeper back or if the 
next is just squarer, but the fourth gets the same shot, this time for three 
runs. That’s nine runs in three balls for Warner, who’s still comfortably 
batting at a strike rate of over 100 despite not looking at all rushed. Doolan 
decides to join the fun by cover driving three from Steyn’s last ball, taking 
the over to a cost of 12 runs.

9.59am GMT 

19th over: 84-1 (Warner 57 Doolan 2)

That was a nice shot for no runs - Doolan is starting to get the pace of this 
pitch, it seems, as he crisply strikes Abbott off his pads, but it shoots 
straight to the square leg fieldsman. Doolan instead plays chip-and-charge 
toward cover, getting through for one. Warner clips a single to long leg. This 
is Warner’s fourth score over 50 in five innings this series, he’s liking it 
here.

9.55am GMT 

18th over: 82-1 (Warner 56 Doolan 1)

Warner escapes Steyn with a single to the leg side, then Doolan is tied down 
on the crease as the ball is moving around a little. Eventually Doolan is bale 
to get off the mark, as a straight drive is misfielded and knocked away. One 
run results. Shaun Marsh looks on with envy.

9.51am GMT 

17th over: 80-1 (Warner 55 Doolan 0)

Kyle Abbott starts his next over with a full ball which Warner clouts down the 
ground for four. Easy runs there. The next ball is shorter and Warner is 
under-edging it into his body, before cutting the next straight to cover. 
Abbott decides to try around the wicket, and produces a beauty - good bounce, 
moving away from Warner off the seam, beating the drive. Warner is unperturbed, 
and gets a single through cover. He’s scored 16 runs since Doolan arrived, 
while Doolan has faced only six balls and isn’t off the mark.

“Advantage Australia,” says confused tennis umpire Peter Farlam, “but Dale 
Steyn and Kyle Abbott are looking promising. Long way to go ... but I don’t 
fancy SA’s chances batting fourth.”

9.45am GMT 

16th over: 75-1 (Warner 50 Doolan 0)

Warner is so confident now he brings up his half century with a five. He takes 
a quick single, Philander’s thrown hits the stumps at the non-striker’s end, 
then deflects to beat Amla to the rope. Doolan stands up tall to deflect 
Steyn’s final short ball of the over.
 Australia's David Warner celebrates his 50. Photograph: Mike Hutchings/Reuters
Updated at 10.58am GMT

9.41am GMT 

15th over: 70-1 (Warner 45 Doolan 0)

Gorgeous shot by Warner! He only gets two runs from it, but it was a back-foot 
drive on the up from a very good Kyle Abbott ball, and he timed it to 
perfection. Duminy hauled it in just inside the rope. Warner knocks another two 
runs to the big empty patch on the leg side, then takes a single to the same 
area. Dan Liebke sums up my feelings precisely.
Dan Liebke (@LiebCricket) 
The viewers will be pleased to have seen off that opening spell from Mark 
Nicholas.#SAvAUS <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/LiebCricket/statuses/439695470747611136> March 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/LiebCricket/statuses/439695470747611136> 
9.36am GMT 

14th over: 65-1 (Warner 40 Doolan 0)

Great comeback from Steyn, after being smacked for 18 from two errant overs. 
Warner nearly added another four immediately, but a diving save in the covers 
prevented the boundary. Warner then took the Red Bull single to mid off, and 
Rogers was dismissed next ball, Steyn coming around the wicket to the 
left-hander and going very wide on the crease, bowling one that angled in and 
jagged away a touch after hitting the pitch hard. Rogers was driving on the up, 
and fell over a bit, his head falling over the line of the ball, which was a 
bit too wide outside his off stump for the stroke. His dismissal brought on 
drinks, after which Alex Doolan came out and negotiated the final three balls 
without alarm.

Updated at 9.40am GMT

9.31am GMT 

WICKET! Rogers 25, c Smith b Steyn

The key man has done it! Returning to the attack, he draws a big drive from 
Rogers, takes the edge, and a straightforward catch at slip.

9.28am GMT 

13th over: 64-0 (Rogers 25 Warner 39)

The new inclusion Kyle Abbott arrives for his first over, and produces the 
first maiden of the innings. That included a ripper of an off-cutter the beat 
Rogers by about a foot, and leapt off a length. Promising start.

“Can’t call it the Rose Bowl any more, sadly- not sadly!” says Mark Nicholas, 
who almost forgot that money makes everything good and better. Silly Mark 
Nicholas.


9.23am GMT 

12th over: 64-0 (Rogers 25 Warner 39)

Fair dinkum, Cape Town just looks made up. Every time the camera goes to a 
wide background shot I’m convinced they’ve just got a green screen up, playing 
some sort of Windows Vista background photo. Duminy continues against this 
backgrop, Warner getting two runs from a thick inside edge to fine leg, before 
driving a single to long off. The Australians are batting at 5.55 runs per 
over. Rogers takes the edge off that with two dots and a single.


9.21am GMT 

11th over: 60-0 (Rogers 24 Warner 36)

Morkel continuing, bowling too full, and the Australians take toll! First 
Warner drives 3 runs through cover, then Rogers drives 4 through point. “That 
was so like Justin Langer it’s not funny,” says Mark Nicholas, who has failed 
to grasp that Justin Langer is not an inherently comedic concept.

I only just learned that Duminy won the man of the match award in the last 
Test. What a load of rot, eh? Surely that was Steyn’s oversized novelty Justin 
Langer doll or whatever it was.

9.17am GMT 

10th over: 53-0 (Rogers 20 Warner 33)

Here’s a spicy one, JP Duminy on to bowl the tenth over of the first innings 
of a Test. Not a common occurrence, I’ll wager. Warner takes a single, then 
Rogers takes a brace of braces, one through midwicket and the other through 
cover. The 50 partnership comes up in brisk time.

9.12am GMT 

9th over: 48-0 (Rogers 16 Warner 32)

Warner takes four balls to get a single this time, but it was hardly 
uneventful. A big inside edge, a big under edge into the ground, then a solid 
smash to cover for none. Finally he gets a single into the covers, and Rogers 
is made to look vulnerable to another snorting short ball from Morkel, one that 
clipped Rogers’ arm as he tried to duck it. Morkel is fierce today. Rogers now 
hasn’t scored for several overs.

9.07am GMT 

8th over: 47-0 (Rogers 16 Warner 31)

Warner keeps ticking away with a single first ball, cut away. Then there’s a 
big edge from Rogers to a Philander ball that crashes into his pad, nothing 
more than a near-miss groan from the slips. Finally a quiet over from South 
Africa.

9.03am GMT 

7th over: 46-0 (Rogers 16 Warner 30)

Morkel versus Warner now, and the second ball is scooped into the midwicket 
region from a cramped pull shot, but landed safely and he profits by two runs. 
Morkel finally lands a nice bouncer on leg stump, right-arm over to the 
left-handed batsman, and Warner is ducking down with a bit of a flinch. The 
next is pitched up, and Warner’s straight punch was boundary-bound before the 
long arm of Morkel got down to stop it running away. Warner knocks a single 
into the covers to keep the strike.

9.00am GMT 

6th over: 43-0 (Rogers 16 Warner 27)

This is turning into a pyrotechnic show! Well, not exactly, the shots aren’t 
outrageous, but Warner clouts three boundaries from one Philander over with 
some sensible shots - two solid pull shots to shorter balls, and a deliberate 
cut over the gully fieldsman. He gets a leading edge to the final ball, but it 
clears cover for a run. 27 from 21 balls now for Warner, strike rate of 128. 
Australia has 43 from 36 balls.

8.54am GMT 

5th over: 30-0 (Rogers 16 Warner 14)

Whoosh! Graeme Smith drags Steyn after two overs, and brings Morne Morkel on. 
The taller man is on the money right from the start - his first ball is 148 
kph, and his second is a beauty, clocked at 150 despite being very short, 
squaring up Rogers and having him fend outside off as it leapt off a length and 
carried through above shoulder height to AB de Villiers. Vicious stuff. The 
third ball is a repeat of the second, bounding from the deck. The fourth is a 
touch fuller, and Rogers is able to cut a boundary just by getting bat on ball. 
Great bowling from Morkel first up, and well countered by Rogers. This could be 
a brilliant contest in itself.

8.49am GMT 

4th over: 26-0 (Rogers 12 Warner 14)

Now Philander goes to the rope, Warner with a lovely on-drive from an 
over-pitched delivery as Philander searches for the lbw. Before that, Rogers 
drove 3 runs through cover. The runs flowing freely, but Philander has bowled 
nicely so far, a couple of balls hooping into the pads of the left-hander, with 
Warner keeping them watchfully out.

8.47am GMT 

3rd over: 19-0 (Rogers 9 Warner 10)

Now Warner is away! That was an elegant and refined shot by his standards, a 
lovely fluent cover drive to an over-pitched Steyn delivery. Three boundaries 
in Steyn’s first eight balls. Warner takes 3 runs from the next ball with a 
punch through cover again, Rogers takes a single through cover, then Warner 
gets two behind point. 18 runs in two Steyn overs, 14 of them between cover and 
backward point.

I quite agree with Gary Naylor’s email to the OBO: “Nothing reveals as much 
about a player as his absence. We might find out quite a bit about Peter Siddle 
today. I rate Pattinson (and he can make late order runs) but third seamer is 
an under-rated role in Test cricket and Siddle is the best since Tim Bresnan’s 
golden period when he was in a side that won Test after Test.”

Siddle’s omission has a touch of the Nathan Lyon about it - an unglamorous 
player who does a job, dropped for a hunch. Pattinson, for mine, is more of a 
strike bowler, a replacement for Johnson or Harris. This bowling attack seams 
unbalanced, if they have to work through a long innings.

8.40am GMT 

2nd over: 9-0 (Rogers 8 Warner 1)

Vernon Philander starting the match from the other end, and David Warner on 
strike. The South Africans made a big show of being affronted by his comments 
about reverse swing during the week, but one wonders whether international 
cricketers should really be bothered by such guff. Seems far more bluster than 
substance. Philander is through Warner and onto the pad, but it was pitching 
outside and missing leg stump. Warner gets the fifth ball away for a single, 
meaning his strike rate is 20. Such a dour plodder, Warner, there’s no room for 
his like in modern Test cricket.

8.38am GMT 

1st over: 8-0 (Rogers 8 Warner 0)

Nice start for Australia, as Dale Steyn approaches Chris Rogers and slews a 
ball way wide of the stumps, almost outside the return crease. His next ball is 
a half volley, and Rogers leans forward to it, just pushes at it with an open 
face, and steers four through backward point. The catching field is well up, so 
there are runs on offer. Two balls later, he glances another boundary through 
fine leg. 8 runs from 6 balls for Rogers, meaning a strike rate of 133.33. Such 
a T20 slogger, this bloke, he’ll never make a Test batsman.

8.23am GMT 

The context

Both sides have plenty to consider, historically. If South Africa win, they’ll 
beat Australia at home for the first time in about 400 years. If Australia win, 
they’ll beat a team other than England in a difficult series for the first time 
in what seems a long while. This is also the scene of one of Australian 
cricket’s great recent humiliations, when they were knocked over for 47. Of 
course, in the same match, Australia bowled out South Africa for 96, with Shane 
Watson taking 5/17. He’s back in the side, so Australia will be hoping for a 
repeat of that part, without a repeat of the other. Plenty of things that may 
be mentally distracting for either side, or that may make no difference at all.

8.16am GMT 

The pitch

That’s a good toss to win for Australia. Shaun Pollock’s assessment of the 
pitch was that there was a little bit of grass on it, a little bit of moisture, 
but that as is often the case, after a short period of early assistance for the 
seamers, it should be a pretty solid batting track. Now it’s up to the 
Australian top order not to collapse like they did last time out.

8.13am GMT 

The toss

... has been won by Australia, who will bat first.

8.13am GMT 

The South African team

Perhaps South Africa’s changes won’t provoke any discussion actually. Quinton 
de Kock is dropped after a very ordinary debut Test, with preferred opener 
Alviro Peterson to come back, and second-Test hero Dean Elgar presumably to bat 
at number three. For the other change, the injured Wayne Parnell has been 
replaced by Kyle Abbott, a selection that a lot of South African fans seem 
excited about.

8.11am GMT 

The Australian team

Two changes for each side, both of which will provoke discussion. We all knew 
Shane Watson would return for the Australians, but most would have tipped Alex 
Doolan to make way. Instead Doolan will hold onto the number three spot, and 
Shaun Marsh is dropped after he followed his first-Test century with a 
second-Test pair of ducks. More controversially, Peter Siddle is also out of 
the team, the man seen by many as the heartbeat of the Australian attack 
dropped for James Pattinson, who hasn’t played a first-class game since the 
Lord’s Test in July last year. Ryan Harris, who has battled with injury and 
form, was the man we expected to miss out, but not to be.

8.08am GMT 

The final, the finale, the decider.

Good evening, ladies and gentleburgs. I hope you’re all poised for excitement, 
as the Guardian stands ready to report every over of what should be an 
enthralling final contest in this three-match series. Fortunately I’m actually 
being honest when I use such adjectives, because it is going to be very 
exciting. Geoff Lemon here with you to kick off our coverage, with Russell 
Jackson and Tom Davies to come in for the subsequent sessions. Email me in the 
first instance with any thoughts, comments, questions or defamatory 
accusations, via geoff.lemon.casual@theguardian.com.

If you’ve missed the start of the series so far, in the first match Australia 
destroyed South Africa, with Mitchell Johnson smashing the South African 
batting, Dale Steyn nullified, and the Australians scoring centuries for fun. 
In the second match South Africa destroyed Australia, with Dale Steyn smashing 
the Australians, Mitchell Johnson nullified, and the South Africans scoring 
centuries for fun. So we’ve seen the best and the worst of each side, and now 
it just remains to be seen which best and which worst we’ll see in this match. 
The winner will take the series. It’s going to be a corker.

12.02am GMT 

Geoff will be here shortly, in the meantime here’s Russell Jackson’s preview:

Full justice has not yet been done to the Australia middle order over the past 
four months, but its propensity for wild mood swings again looms as a liability 
in the decisive third Test in Cape Town. In both clashes of this series so far 
bowlers have won the day, odd as that may seem when batsmen have produced seven 
centuries.

It remains to be seen what psychological scars linger from Australia’s 
infamous and inglorious collapsewhen the teams last met in Cape Town in 2011 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/south-africa-v-australia-2011/engine/match/514029.html>
. Bowled out for 47 in the second innings and surrendering the game by eight 
wickets, the selectors were stung into picking teenage paceman Pat Cummins, 
whose sole Test appearance now feels an aeon ago. With this series still alive 
they can now call on James Pattinson or Jackson Bird if they deem either Ryan 
Harris or Peter Siddle too leg-weary to deliver the 20 wickets needed.

It’s more likely that they will recall Shane Watson, just as often hobbled as 
Cummins, but now much less likely to land a knockout blow. If Dale Steyn and 
Vernon Philander reprise their roles of arch villains, Watson’s handy seamers 
might not matter, though “Cape Town 47” did relegate Watson’s own spell of five 
for 17 in that game to the annals of obscurity. The Australia coach, Darren 
Lehmann, has said: “Velocity’s a big thing for us,” an image that doesn’t 
exactly conjure up thoughts of his returning all-rounder.

“I don’t warrant a spot as a batsman at this point,” Watson said, “but I know 
I can hold my spot as an all-rounder.” With his bowling capacity yet to be 
tested, it’s not the kind of statement that will imbue the opposition with many 
doubts, and Australia may need more than just proficiency.
 