
Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi smiles a cheeky smile and puts a vuvuzela to his 
lips. His eyes are fixed in concentration, his cheeks puffed out – and he 
produces a hearty rasp that must drive his mother crazy.

Siya is five years old, and looks healthy and happy. His mother Nonzuzo says 
he has never had flu or any other illness, and has never needed a doctor. He 
enjoys playing football with older boys and is doing well at school.

"Definitely, I want him to be a lawyer," 23-year-old Nonzuzo said. "I don't 
know what he's going to choose – but he's so clever, man.

"This one, when he was three years old, when he started the creche he spent 
only a month and he knew all the recitations ... he could count one to 20 and 
he was only two years old."

But for all his mother's hopes, Siya's life path is still strewn with 
obstacles.

He shares a bed with his mother and father in a cramped, single-room shack of 
only about 12 square metres.

On the floor, the lino is cracked and worn. There are shiny cooking pots on 
top of a fridge, a vacuum cleaner, a gas canister, a cheap white wardrobe and a 
TV, DVD player and stereo amplifier beneath wood planks and a corrugated tin 
roof.

Beyond the front door, made of battered wood with a painted number, electric 
wiring and a washing line hang above the muddy yard.

There is no flushing toilet, and no washing facilities apart from a tub of 
soapy water resting on a stool.

Siya and his family share a communal kitchen and its contents.

Do not look for a street address here – there is just a random sprawl of 
self-constructed shacks and fences dotting muddy dirt tracks. The beaches and 
upmarket restaurants of nearby Cape Town seem a million miles away.

"At night here it's very dangerous," Nonzuzo said. "Even in the morning when I 
go to work, there's a lot of crime – you have to be careful. You have to be 
home at 10 at night if you don't want trouble.

"If you stay home there will be nothing, but if you roam around here at night 
these little boys will ask for money and, if you don't have it, maybe [they] 
take your shoes and go and sell them."

But, she added, there have been changes for the good. "Khayelitsha has a lot 
of improvements," she said.

"In the last five years, they have built a youth centre where all the youth 
can gather together and talk about crime and everything. They have computers 
there, and fitness training. There is even a guesthouse here with foreign 
guests."

Five years ago, Nonzuzo's future was uncertain. She recalled: "I was 18 when I 
gave birth. I was too young – but anyway, what can I do?

"I was too young but I'm proud that, after I had him, I went back to school 
and wrote my grade 11 and passed, then I did my matric [a school exam] and 
passed."

Her ambition was to study to become a tourist guide, but it hasn't worked out 
that way. "Things didn't go too well with the money," she said. "My dad didn't 
have any money to send me to college. I applied for a bursary, but my 
application failed."

But in 2007, Nonzuzo did take a six-month college course in office 
administration. She passed as the top student in the class and shows, with 
pride, the photos of her graduation day.

Last year, she took a job as a waitress in a casino, leaving home each day at 
6am to work from 7am to 7pm. She earns 2,100 rand (£185) a month and said: 
"It's not enough to live on. It's not enough for food. I pay R150 (£13) for 
school fees for Siya."

But she hasn't given up on her original career ambition. "I'm disappointed but 
I can't just let that dream [go] away. I'm going to study because I've started 
saving now - R500 (£44) every month. I won't work there long.

"If I have 10,000 (£883) in my savings, I will study travel and tourism."

Nonzuzo is still unmarried, but is still with Siya's father, Benson Ntsimango. 
He lost his job at a steakhouse when it closed down, but does part-time work 
cooking with local women. He also acts as something of a house husband, looking 
after Siya when Nonzuzo is out at work.

"He cooks when I arrive at home," she said. He does mind, because he says it's 
not fair for me to provide for him and Siya. We're not married yet – hopefully 
soon. I'm waiting for him to ask, but I said first he must go to see my parents 
and uncles to talk."

Nonzuzo moved out of her parents' house two years ago to give them more space. 
Benson built their new home on land allocated by a local street committee. In 
summer, it gets very hot – in winter, very cold.

"It's a small place," Nonzuzo added. "I want to move. I don't think it's 
healthy here. There are no toilets. Benson built some toilets himself, but in 
summer I think it's going to be a big problem because it doesn't flush, it's 
just dig a hole and then put something to sit on and then cover it."

Her parents, Livingstone and Nokothula, brother and four sisters are still 
alive and she now has four nieces. But tragedy struck the family this year when 
her nephew died at the age of three months. Nonzuzo says the mother, her 
17-year-old sister, had been drinking and staying out late.

Nonzuzo has got through some difficult early years and cherishes her 
bright-eyed son. "I love him so much. He's full of energy," she said. "He was 
up at six o'clock. I don't have to set an alarm now, because he's my alarm." 
And Nonzuzo has special reason to feel optimistic – in September, she is due to 
give birth to a brother or sister for Siya.

Factfile: South Africa

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 67

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 42.9%

Debt per capita: $874.83 (£559.89)

Life expectancy: 53

% children in education (F/M): 85.9/85.7
 