
4.53pm GMT 

Full-time:

A deserved victory for South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica> nad a triumph for manager 
Gordon Igesund, who made five changes to the side that stunk in the first game 
and saw all the newcomers do well, as did his substitutes in the course of the 
game. The hosts played with a zip and incision that was entirely lacking in the 
first match and will now be confident of beating Cape Verde to secure passage 
to the quarter-finals. Angola were awful.

4.48pm GMT 

90 min:

There will be three more minutes for Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> to disgrace themselves.

4.47pm GMT 

89 min:

Superb quick thinking and distribution by Khune, who boots the ball downfield 
to Majoro, who lifts the ball over the keeper from 25 yards ... .and inches 
over the bar!

4.46pm GMT 

88 min:

Amaro collapses to the ground claiming that Ngongca conked him in the face. It 
is a disgraceful over-reaction, as the defender merely brushed against him. 
It's rare you see such filth in this tournament.

4.42pm GMT 

85 min:

Angola substitution: Amaro on, Guilherme off.

4.42pm GMT 

84 min:

Manuho gets proper service for the first time in the game, courtesy of a cross 
from the right from Lunguinha. The centre-forward leaps above his marker and 
directs a respectable header towards goal. Khune saves well.

4.41pm GMT 

83 min:

Lama races out of his box in an attempt to cut out a ball over the top from 
Parker. But that was rash, as Miguel already had it covered and the keeper's 
intrusion only caused confusion. Happily, Miguel kept his head sufficiently to 
well the ball into the stands.

4.38pm GMT 

80 min:

Ten minutes to go and Angola still look light years from a comeback. Cape 
Verde will fancy their chances of beating them in the last game.

4.35pm GMT 

78 min:

South Africa sub: Manyisa replaces Mphela.

4.34pm GMT 

76 min:

Khune does a De Gea from the corner but is lucky enough to get away with 
nothing more serious than another corner. This time his defence tidy up for him.

4.33pm GMT 

75 min:

Khumalo concedes a freekick by performing an impromptu scrum with Guilherme at 
the edge of the area. Will he be made to regret that? No, he wo't, because 
Gilberto's freekick comes off the wall and goes out for a corner.

4.30pm GMT 

72 min:

Angola cough up the ball in their own half. Mphela aims a cross towards the 
near post. Majoro tries to poke it past the keeper but only finds the 
sidenetting.

4.29pm GMT 

71 min:

Angola are showing plenty of will to get back into this but South Africa are 
looking comfortable.

4.25pm GMT 

68 min:

Dinky build-up by Angola for the first time in the game. Mateus took a pass 
from Lunguinha and then backheeled the ball back into the full-back's path, 
only for Lunguinha to aim a weak shot at the keeper from 18 yards. Bad choice. 

4.24pm GMT 

66 min:

Bastos does well to hold off Mphela and prevent South Africa from claiming a 
third.

4.22pm GMT 

63 min:

Angola change: Gilberto on, Dede calls it a day.

4.20pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 2-0 Angola (Majoro 61)

Moments after Angola botched a chance to score at the other end, they are 
caught out by a ball over the top. Majoro glides past an oafish challenge by 
Bastos and then, from an acute angle, slides the ball between Lama's legs and 
into the net! The hosts are surely going to the top of the group now.

4.16pm GMT 

59 min:

Angola have improved in this half and shown more ability to supply Manucho and 
Alonso with a touch of guile, as opposed to the hopeful hoofs they were sending 
down in the first period. But South Africa remain on top.

4.15pm GMT 

57 min:

South Africa sub: Majoro on, Rantie off.

4.12pm GMT 

55 min:

Proper end-to-end action here now! Furman received the ball at the edge of the 
area and curled a low shot towards the bottom corner. Lama made a meal of 
dealing with it but just about got enough on it to push it away for a corner.

4.11pm GMT 

53 min:

A chance for Angola, and a bad miss by Angola. It was elementary in its 
construction, a charge down the right culminating with a low cross from Mateus. 
Afonso peeled off his marker and got a good contact on the ball from eight 
yards but shot straight at Khune.

4.09pm GMT 

51 min:

"That's another fight ball played by Angola" - Eurosport summariser (Stuart 
Robson?) summaries well.

4.07pm GMT 

48 min:

Massunguna gets a booking for smashing into Rantie. If you are every trying to 
get a card, that is an excellent way to go about it.

4.04pm GMT 

46 min:

South Africa substitution: Mahlango, who did well in midfield in the first 
half, has been replaced by Letsholonaye, presumably owing to injury. Angola 
were trying to make a substitution too but didn't manage to do so before the 
ref signaled for the second half to begin. A suitably farcical start to the 
second half. Speaking of farcical, there's got to be a decent chance of one of 
these teams matchingthis, from PSV 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/video/2013/jan/23/psv-eindhoven-miss-video>.

3.48pm GMT 

Half-time:

It would be a stretch to call that 'good', but it was, at least, better than 
the first two matches in this group. The changes made by Bafana manager Gordon 
Igesud have born fruit, with Furman, Mahlangu and Rantie all adding zip to the 
hosts' attack but Rantie and Mphela have still been guilty of ropey finishing: 
they should be further in front. Angola have been dire.

3.45pm GMT 

44 min:

Moments after Lama saves a long shot from Parker, he makes a mess of a cross 
from the right and is fortunate that Bafana were not able to take advantage. 
From the wretched to the ridiculous, that's where Angola are heading.

3.44pm GMT 

42 min:

Appalling! Angola managed to cobble together their best move of the match 
before clumping a long cross into the box. Manucho cleverly nodded it back to 
Mateus ..... who bogged the ball 40 yards over the bar!

3.40pm GMT 

39 min:

Hoooooof! It's Angola's preferred method of approach. And it darn near paid of 
just now as Dede punt almost ran to Manucho. But Khune reacted quickly to 
scamper out of his box and head the ball to safety.

3.37pm GMT 

36 min:

Angola feebly surrender possession in midfield. Mahlangu seizes on the 
breaking ball and gallops forward before sending a low bobbler well wide from 
20 yards. Angola are a shambles.

3.35pm GMT 

33 min:

Phala tries to trick his way down the right and into the box but Geraldo puts 
and end to his conniving. Parker swings in the ensuing corner and Khumalo dives 
to head wide.

3.33pm GMT 

31 min:

So, Angola do have something about them: dangerous set-pieces. Manucho met a 
well-delivered corner at the near post and forced Khune into a splendid save!

3.31pm GMT 

GOAL! South Africa 1-0 Angola (Sangweni 29)

South Africa took a short freekick wide on the right and then whipped the ball 
into the box. It was headed up in the air and Sangweni eyed it intently as it 
came down and then cracked a fine low volley into the net from a difficult 
angle about eight yards out. That is exactly what this game - this group - 
needed: now let's see if Angola have got anything about them.

3.28pm GMT 

26 min:

Angola have been shockingly bland so far. South Africa are, at least, hinting 
at enterprise and good intentions, and they have a bit of speed out wide and 
some nimbleness in their exchanges. Angola are just plodding around bumping 
into people. And when they get the ball they give it away within a few passes.

3.24pm GMT 

23 min:

Nice move by South Africa, featuring some intricate interplay around the 
Angolan box ... but concluding with a preposterous shot into the clouds by 
Rantie.

3.22pm GMT 

21 min:

Angola have so far offered nothing beyond tolerable diligence and the 
occasional shunt. 

3.19pm GMT 

18 min:

Parker crosses low from the left. Mphela beats the keeper to it at the near 
post but can't keep the ball in play. It's all Bafana Bafana so far.

3.18pm GMT 

16 min:

Angola have yet to wake up. Rantie threatened to give them a cold shower just 
now when he charged into the box and let fly from 16 yards .... but his shot 
flew wide.

3.16pm GMT 

14 min:

South Africa continue to attack. Mphela wriggles his way into the left-hand 
side of the box and unleashes a shot ... that is unwittingly blocked by Rantie 
... who is pulled up for offside despite being onside by about four yards. Oh 
dear. "Hello Dear Sir, I need to discuss with you regarding a business 
transaction, please reply," writes Guo Xiang. Certainly, I'll get straight to 
you after this match. After getting my bank account details too, of course.

3.14pm GMT 

12 min:

South Africa take a shot corner and then work the ball to Furman at the edge 
of the area. His shot is charged down by Pirolito. Angola are defending well 
but South Africa will be reasonably happy with their start, as they have 
already shown far more vim and thrust than they did against Cape Verde. Still 
no sign of sure touches in the opposing box though.

3.11pm GMT 

10 min:

South Africa go close! It was an in-swinging freekick from Sangweni on the 
left that cause the trouble: no defender managed to cut it out ... and no 
forward managed to knock it in, meaning the ball bounced just wide of the far 
post. "Mphela’s nickname is Killer," notes Julian Beffon, "Of slow-moving worms 
and high-flying insects, I fear."

3.09pm GMT 

8 min:

Mphela may not have scored much lately but that doesn't seem to have affected 
his confidence: he attempts to fire the ball into the net from 35 yards. The 
outcome is such that his confidence should be well and truly shot now.

3.08pm GMT 

7 min:

Masilela slides in to dispossess Mateus as the midfielder began to look 
dangerous again down the right. It's even so far. If you want to liven thigns 
up, why not get yourselfa pair of these 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/Angola-Flag-Havaianas-Flip-Flops-size-8-/261157953337?pt=UK_Men_s_Shoes&hash=item3cce3a1f39>
?

3.05pm GMT 

4 min:

Parker, one of only six South African survivors from their first match, curls 
a freekick in from the right. Mphela leaps to meet it but lofts his 12-yard 
header way over the bar.

3.04pm GMT 

3 min:

Angola are the first to bare their teeth. After winning the ball in midfield 
they popped the ball wide to Mateus, who charged in from the right before 
having a ping from 25 yards. It fizzed a few yards wide. 

3.01pm GMT 

1 min:

We have kick-off. Angola have not conceded a goal in their last five matches 
and, of course, shut out a decent Morocco side on Saturday. South Africa will 
have their work cut out to infiltrate them, though the Impalas do seem set to 
go for a more attacking approach than they did against the hosts, as Manucho 
will be partnered by Guilherme Afonso - a striker who plays his club football 
with FC VAduz, the pride of Liechtenstein.

2.55pm GMT 

Preamble:

No time for a lengthy preamble due to snow-related misadventures (covering the 
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
while shivering in a London bunker is a little like attending a wine-tasting 
fiesta with a muzzle. But hey ho, stiff upper lip and all that). Anyway, 
neither of these teams deserve a lengthy preamble after their frankly boring 
starts to the tournament. South Africa were particularly drab and they've made 
plenty of changes in a bid to avoid a first round exit in their tournament they 
are hosting. The most notable newcomer is Katelego Mphela, the formerly 
prolific striker who has been brought back after prolonged injury-enforced 
absences and form dips, all in an effort to boost the attacking power of Bafana 
Bafana, who were impotent when being held rather easily to a 0-0 draw by Cape 
Verde on Saturday. Manucho wasn't up to the much for Angola in the first game 
so he could do with getting his act together too. All in all, better from 
everyone: that's what we're looking for here.

1.54pm GMT 

Teams

South Africa: 16-Itumeleng Khune; 5-Anele Ngcongca, 14-Bongani Khumalo, 
21-Siyabonga Sangweni, 3-Tsepo Masilela; 15-Dean Furman, 19-May Mahlangu, 
18-Thuso Phala, 17-Bernard Parker; 9-Katlego Mphela, 23-Tokelo Rantie

Angola: 1-Lama; 3-Lunguinha, 13-Bastos, 4-Dani Massunguna, 15-Miguel; 
16-Pirolito, 6-Dede, 17-Mateus, 18-Geraldo; 23-Guilherme Afonso, 9-Manucho

Referee: Komlan Coulibaly (Mali)

Updated at 2.45pm GMT
 