
4.10pm GMT 

End of Day 3

That’s a wrap, then. The day started relatively evenly, with Australia on 
4/112, but no Australian batsman aside from Steve Smith were able to take 
advantage of the benign conditions. Australia were bowled out for 246, a 
deficit of 177 runs, after Smith was sawn off by a dubious third-umpire 
decision following a DRS referral by the South Africans.

Australia had some hope when South Africa fell to 42/2, but from there Hashim 
Amla carried them to safety, with smaller contributions from AB de Villiers and 
Faf du Plessis. At 192/4, South Africa are 369 runs ahead, with wickets in 
hand, and two full days left to bowl. The advantage is with them, but we shall 
all return tomorrow to se whether Australia can summon some meaningful 
resistance.

Thanks to Scott Heinrich and Russell Jackson, who took us through the earlier 
sessions, and thanks to you all out there for joining us. Till tomorrow.

4.01pm GMT 

47th over: South Africa 192-4 (Amla 93, de Kock 9)

This will be the last over of the day, I believe. Amla maintaining his focus, 
twice turning Lyon to short leg, looking to score but being watchful at the 
same time. From there he gives away thoughts of scores, and concentrates on 
batting out a maiden.

3.58pm GMT 

46th over: South Africa 192-4 (Amla 93, de Kock 9)

Four straight down the ground, and Hashim Amla is into the 90s. Can he get to 
the hundred today? Will he want to? There are five minutes left. He takes a 
single - that’s 93 now. Quinton de Kock finally gets his first Test boundary, 
clipping Siddle off his legs to the midwicket boundary. Then he defends the 
next ball so Amla can take strike.

3.53pm GMT 

45th over: South Africa 183-4 (Amla 88, de Kock 5)

That’s enough from Johnson, says the skipper, and brings Nathan Lyon back on. 
Amla can only manage one run, from the final ball.

3.50pm GMT 

44th over: South Africa 182-4 (Amla 87, de Kock 5)

Amla is perhaps starting to tire, it’s been a long day for him. More of his 
shots are hitting off-centre at the moment. Again they trade singles. De Kock 
is guarding his stumps with great determination, until the final ball from 
Siddle, when he tries a mighty cover drive straight to the field.

3.45pm GMT 

43rd over: South Africa 179-4 (Amla 85, de Kock 4)

So Johnson’s short-pitched attack continues making life uncomfortable for the 
batsmen, but they profit to the tune of four singles, and the catch is dropped.

3.41pm GMT 

DROPPED!

Johnson again - spears a ball down the leg side, Amla gets a big edge while 
trying to glance, and Haddin had to dive for a one-handed take, but he’s taken 
far harder catches, it was well within his reach. He just didn’t time it right, 
and instead of dismissing Amla short of a century, Haddin has taken him one run 
closer to it.

3.40pm GMT 

42nd over: South Africa 175-4 (Amla 83, de Kock 2)

Things are slowing up a little as we approach stumps, with Amla possibly 
thinking of a century, and the new boy de Kock trying to play himself in. Amla 
takes a single from Siddle’s third ball, then de Kock gets his second run from 
his 14th ball as he drives to long off. The South African lead is now 352.

3.34pm GMT 

41st over: South Africa 173-4 (Amla 82, de Kock 1)

Amla has been prolific through the covers today, and he drives two more runs 
from Johnson’s second ball. We’ve just reached what should have been stumps, 
but the over rate is really slow in this match, so we’ll play the extra half 
hour, and I’ll report on it if I can convince my brain to stay awake and pay 
attention. Amla scampers a single from the final ball - Johnson fielded, and I 
think his throw hit the batsman, but it was very near the stumps.

3.29pm GMT 

40th over: South Africa 170-4 (Amla 79, de Kock 1)

A good over, there - a maiden from Siddle to de Kock, and he was in trouble 
from that last ball when he edged back into his pads and endangered his stumps. 
The debutant survives though.

3.24pm GMT 

39th over: South Africa 170-4 (Amla 79, de Kock 1)

Amla is playing the short ball with a minimum of fuss, evading a couple, 
before placing one wide of gully for a run. There’s a moment where de Kock 
shows Johnson his stumps, but manages to get his bat down in time. De Kock gets 
his innings going with a run from the final ball.

3.18pm GMT 

38th over: South Africa 168-4 (Amla 78, de Kock 0)

Siddle beats Amla with the first ball of this new spell, then concedes a 
single with the third. That brings de Kock on to face his first ball. He’s a 
left-hander, and Siddle bowling across him gets one that keeps really low and 
beats the drive. The next is only half collared as well. De Kock will be 
nervous, especially after his horrible dismissal in the first innings.

3.15pm GMT 

37th over: South Africa 167-4 (Amla 76)

That over had begun with four leg byes from Johnson, as his bouncer flicked 
Amla’s helmet and zoomed away. It cost runs, but showed intent, and from the 
over’s last ball, Johnson took his 52nd wicket since the start of the last 
Ashes series.

3.12pm GMT 

WICKET! de Villiers 29, c Haddin b Johnson

Johnson gets the breakthrough again! That was a little short and a little 
wide, but not too much of either. De Villiers tried the uppercut, but it beat 
him for bounce and pace, and he could only nick behind. There’s one well 
against the run of play.

3.08pm GMT 

36th over: South Africa 162-3 (Amla 76, de Villiers 29)

Amla certainly looks in touch. On track for a century soon, as he drives 
through cover for four, then plays a perfect straight drive for one. De 
Villiers likes the look of all this, and gets down on one knee to send another 
cover drive to the fence. Then again - this is outrageous stuff here, a drive 
on the up, standing up tall, and another boundary. It makes 13 from the Harris 
over. Cruise control is activated.

3.02pm GMT 

35th over: South Africa 149-3 (Amla 71, de Villiers 21)

Johnson is bowling left-arm over, leaving too many balls to wide of the 
right-handed de Villiers. Then Johnson gets on the pads, and is taken square 
for two. A back-foot punch yields a single, then Amla adds another.

2.55pm GMT 

34th over: South Africa 145-3 (Amla 70, de Villiers 18)

Ryan Harris is back. Australia need a bit more from the creakiest man in world 
cricket. But they won’t get it straight away, as Amla plays the most exquisite 
cover drive, again using the wrists late, opening the face of the bat at the 
last second to ensure the ball finds the gap in the covers and speeds to the 
rope. Pure class.

Updated at 3.02pm GMT

2.52pm GMT 

33rd over: South Africa 141-3 (Amla 66, de Villiers 18)

Thwack. De Villiers trying to put Lyon off his length here. Lyon bowls a good 
ball, but de Villiers goes way back onto his stumps, making it the slightest 
bit short, then plays a cross-batted swat that sees the ball fly away flat to 
the rope. The rest of the over he defends. Pulling the strings and seeing if 
the marionette will dance.

2.46pm GMT 

32nd over: South Africa 137-3 (Amla 66, de Villiers 14)

Amla is toying with Clarke now. He is being attended by two short midwickets, 
so he beats them with a shot to the midwicket fence. Then he takes a single to 
cover. The cheek. De Villiers gets another run of his own.

2.43pm GMT 

31st over: South Africa 131-3 (Amla 61, de Villiers 13)

Just three singles from Lyon’s over. To be clear, when I say “before too long” 
I mean early tomorrow morning. Though de Villiers and Amla at top pace could 
almost do the job tonight. 350 would be enough, you’d think, but no doubt this 
side will push well past 400.

2.39pm GMT 

30th over: South Africa 128-3 (Amla 59, de Villiers 12)

De Villiers has already secured his record of 12 consecutive Tests in which 
he’s scored at least a half century. Him scoring runs in the second innings 
just seems a bit excessive now. I wouldn’t necessarily mind if he got out - for 
the sake of the contest, you understand. He doesn’t want to, though, and 
prefers to cream Siddle down the ground on the off drive. It was better than 
the ball before, when he glided four to third man. The lead has just jumped to 
305, and if these two carry on as they have been, we’ll be close to declaration 
territory before too long.

2.34pm GMT 

29th over: South Africa 120-3 (Amla 59, de Villiers 4)

Lyon is getting a bit short to Amla, and gives up a single and a brace as a 
result. AB gets a bit tangled facing his first ball from Lyon, then charges the 
next, but can only inside edge into the ground and then the hand of Smith at 
short leg. He finally succeeds in getting a run away.

2.31pm GMT 

28th over: South Africa 116-3 (Amla 56, de Villiers 3)

With Johnson not producing the magic, and Harris a bit off the boil in this 
series, the task has fallen to Australia’s less heralded bowlers. Lyon did well 
in the first innings, and Siddle has got rid of Elgar and du Plessis here. He’s 
continuing now, bowling tightly, a maiden to de Villiers.

I’m getting some quality emails this series from Ravi Nair. “I decided to 
support Australia this series, perhaps just prove not all poms are whingers. 
But after yesterday and today, including the horror of hoping that “Slugger” 
Warner does well, I’m feeling The Fear. Worrying about the fourth innings. 
Scared MiJo’s lost his mojo. Thereby proving I’m a whinging pom. Can’t catch a 
break...” Have faith, my friend. Or a beer.

2.27pm GMT 

27th over: South Africa 116-3 (Amla 56, de Villiers 3)

The key man, AB de Villiers, is now in the middle, and with he and Amla going 
well, South Africa will be very confident indeed. They work three singles from 
this Lyon over, a lot more controlled than AB’s scratchy start against Lyon 
last time around.

2.26pm GMT 

26th over: South Africa 113-3 (Amla 55, de Villiers 1)

It was beautifully bowled, that over, by a bowler complaining of some 
soreness. He tied du Plessis down for four balls, then produced the perfect 
seamer’s stock ball with the fifth.

I don’t think Australia can really hope to limit South Africa to a gettable 
total, unless there’s a very dramatic collapse, but they have to at least tie 
South Africa down, disrupting the timeline of the hosts’ plans.

2.22pm GMT 

WICKET! du Plessis 24, c Haddin b Siddle

Great ball from Siddle - just as his previous wicket, it was that awkward 
length that’s just a touch short but not short enough to easily get away, and 
it moved slightly off the seam. Kissed the edge of the bat, and that was all 
she wrote. Siddle stepping up here.

2.16pm GMT 

25th over: South Africa 112-2 (Amla 55, du Plessis 24)

Some minor surgery is done to the ball with the umpire’s scissors, and it 
nearly does the trick, as Amla goes right back on his stumps, pads together 
almost in a French cricket style, and gets an inside edge that both blocks the 
lbw shout and runs away through a vacant patch of grass behind square. He takes 
two fortunate runs.

2.13pm GMT 

24th over: South Africa 110-2 (Amla 53, du Plessis 24)

The half century is up, and that may be Amla’s shot of the day, a drive 
through midwicket - his was all timing and bat face, where du Plessis did it 
earlier with muscle. 52 from 53 balls from Amla, 8 fours. He takes a single to 
square leg to follow up.

2.10pm GMT 

23rd over: South Africa 105-2 (Amla 48, du Plessis 24)

Nathan Lyon returns to try to slow the scoring. South Africa raise the hundred 
after a couple of singles. It looks like they have a much clearer purpose than 
in the first innings - they’re looking to set a big lead as quickly as 
possible, so they can declare with probably five sessions to bowl Australia 
out. I doubt they’ll need that many, but safety first. As if to emphasise the 
point, du Plessis skips down the pitch and drives Lyon flat and hard along the 
ground to the long-on fence. The last four overs have conceded 7, 7, 8, and 8.

2.05pm GMT 

22nd over: South Africa 98-2 (Amla 46, du Plessis 19)

I lied, Harris hasn’t come off. Instead the snake-wristed one has just changed 
ends, relieving Johnson. Different end, same result, says Amla, who punches 
strongly off the back foot from the first ball of the over, racking up another 
boundary. These two are purring now. Amla uses a lot of wrist to work two more 
runs through square leg, that was a contortionist effort, then pushes a single 
through cover. There’s a sweeper out there now, not sure if he was there before 
this over, but Amla is scoring heavily out that way. Closing on a half century.

2.01pm GMT 

21st over: South Africa 91-2 (Amla 39, du Plessis 19)

Pierre Sidelle replaces Harris in the attack, and quelle horreur - a single to 
du Plessis, an elegant three to Amla through cover, then a thwacking drive from 
Faf through wide midwicket. That is quite some shot.

Updated at 2.05pm GMT

1.56pm GMT 

20th over: South Africa 83-2 (Amla 36, du Plessis 10)

Nice shot from Amla, forcing four through cover from Johnson. It confuses the 
fast man a bit, who follows up with a slower ball, then sends a couple very 
wide of off stump. Not making Amla play at those. Finally he tries another 
cutter, and Amla spots it, waits, and square drives gloriously for four more. 
The lead is out to 260, with Australia and their key bowler both starting to 
unravel a little.

Of course, Australia have largely got themselves into this difficult position 
by way of a poor batting effort on a pitch that required patience. One stat 
tells a lot: Australia had six partnerships that exceeded 33 runs, but not one 
that exceeded 40.

1.50pm GMT 

19th over: South Africa 75-2 (Amla 28, du Plessis 10)

Ryan Harris undoes some excellent work in this new over, conceding just a 
single from five well-directed balls, by shooting the last ball down the leg 
side, and it flies away through fine leg for four leg byes after bouncing off 
du Plessis.

1.44pm GMT 

18th over: South Africa 70-2 (Amla 27, du Plessis 10)

Johnson gets a little more menace into his next over, which du Plessis opens 
well, that jumping, across-the-line flick that he plays to bunt the ball toward 
midwicket. It’s an easy way to find a run or two against the shortish ball - 
this time, du Plessis gets a brace. Amla gets a bouncer, over the helmet of 
Amla, who flinches away from it. The next is only tamely short, and easy to 
play off the hip for one.

1.39pm GMT 

17th over: South Africa 66-2 (Amla 26, du Plessis 7)

Bad luck for Harris, a very sharp ball that spat at du Plessis, pushing 
forward, and took a thick edge to third man for four. He shovels a single out 
to square leg afterwards. Amla had earlier taken a run with a very controlled 
pull shot. His form has been off lately, but he’s looked very good so far today.

1.35pm GMT 

16th over: South Africa 60-2 (Amla 25, du Plessis 2)

We’re away in the final session - apparently 41 more overs are required today, 
with the run rates quite slow. I’m not sure of our chances of getting through 
them. Mitchell Johnson will bowl the first of these, and it’s a bit of a 
warm-up over, sharp enough but nothing scary, while du Plessis and Amla each 
profit by one run.

1.33pm GMT 

A matter of intrigue

So it’s been a good day’s cricket thus far. Plenty of wickets, some 
entertaining Australian lower-order runs, a big South African lead, and now a 
couple of early wickets to peg them back again. It’s interesting to see 
Australia thoroughly behind in a Test for the first time since their England 
trip last year - a mark of their maturity will be whether they can salvage even 
a draw out of this match. It’s also a test of South Africa’s temperament - will 
they take advantage of their dominant position and go assertively after a 
result, or drift as they did in their first innings? Questions. They’re good 
because you get to use squiggly punctuation.

1.26pm GMT 

The elements of style

Thank-you to Russell Jackson for the past session of stirring commentary - who 
doesn’t enjoy a good anecdote about Nathan Lyon’s spikes? As for taking you 
home in style - if I may break the fourth wall, a la Kevin Spacey - ‘style’ 
tonight consists of two slices of microwaved leftover pizza and a very 
unattractive knee rug. It is late at night in Melbourne, Australia, and 
literally every other person in the city except for a couple of emergency room 
doctors is down in the CBD, partying on and enjoying themselves at the summer 
White Nights festival, in which street parties and art installations and music 
and events happen throughout the central city all night long.

I am not there. I am here. With you. And the rug. And the aftertaste of spicy 
chicken pizza. I don’t want you to think I’m aggrieved, I just think it’s best 
if we’re upfront with each other. If any of you have anything you want to get 
off your chest, you can email me - manually refresh your browser for the 
address. I can let you use a pseudonym if your confession is particularly 
spicy. Like the pizza. Sigh.

1.11pm GMT 

15th over: South Africa 58-2 (Amla 24, du Plessis 1) - and that is TEA

Lyon is back to bowl what looks like being the final over of the session and 
has Faf du Plessis forward and watchfully defending. I’m not sure what is wrong 
with short leg ace Alex Doolan but Steve Smith is under the helmet now. Lyon 
appears to be staling for time by cleaning his spikes which seems a totally 
bizarre strategy. Surely they’d want to get in another over if they could? I 
know I wanted Lyon to slow down but this is ridiculous.

After a single to du Plessis, Amla glances fine and down the outfield slope 
for a boundary and then sees his side through to tea.

235 is the lead for the Proteas and that is it for me tonight. Stand by for 
Geoff Lemon, who will be taking you through to stumps in style.

Updated at 1.12pm GMT

1.06pm GMT 

14th over: South Africa 53-2 (Amla 20, du Plessis 0)

Just when he’d looked vulnerable Amla pulls out a truly sublime cover drive, 
stroking Siddle away to the fence with an absolute stunner. He’s clearly not in 
form right now but that was a shot from the top shelf. Soon he’s playing 
another and it’s almost identical, executed with an economy of movement in both 
his feet and perfectly still head. Wonderful batting from a master craftsman.

1.02pm GMT 

13th over: South Africa 45-2 (Amla 12, du Plessis 0)

Though Amla is normally a proficient player of spin, Lyon has him in all sorts 
here, going past the edge of the bat and even Haddin’s gloves from one that 
went straight on. That came after Haddin thought he’d stumped the South African.

It’s an interesting little period coming up before tea with Amla just hanging 
in there and the new man du Plessis yet to establish himself. The Aussies will 
be desperate to prize one more wicket before the break.

12.58pm GMT 

12th over: South Africa 42-2 (Amla 10, du Plessis 0)

Before that wicket, Mike Haysman had said that Siddle wass “too straight” in 
being worked to the leg side for an Amla single, which reminded of Gary 
Naylor’s comment from yesterday. With protection in the deep he is actually 
well within his rights to attack the stumps but instinct does tell me that it’s 
a dicey strategy unless it’s faultlessly executed. The risk always looms that 
all you’re going to achieve is easing the batsman into a comfort zone in which 
they’re able to pick off singles at regular intervals.

The Elgar wicket changes all of that. As you were, Mr Siddle.

Updated at 12.59pm GMT

12.56pm GMT 

WICKET! Elgar c Haddin b Siddle 16 (Australia 42-2)

After four probing deliveries Siddle tempts Elgar into a false stroke when he 
lunges forward at a ball he might have left alone and edges behind to Haddin.

Updated at 12.57pm GMT

12.51pm GMT 

11th over: South Africa 41-1 (Elgar 16, Amla 10)

Lyon has a slip, a short leg and a short cover in place to Elgar and gives the 
ball a healthy amount of flight to tempt the batsman forward. He seems far less 
comfortable negotiating the spinner than he did the pacemen and is all elbows 
and angled bat as he tries unsuccessfully to work a single.

At least he’s friendly with the fans...
CA Digital Media (@CricketAus) 
.@MitchJohnson398 <https://twitter.com/MitchJohnson398> swamped by fans 
between deliveries#SAvAUS <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/GkwIvwfQpe <http://t.co/GkwIvwfQpe>
 <https://twitter.com/CricketAus/statuses/437206138128715776> February 22, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/CricketAus/statuses/437206138128715776> 
Updated at 12.57pm GMT

12.48pm GMT 

10th over: South Africa 41-1 (Elgar 16, Amla 10)

Peter Siddle relieves Harris at the other end for his first trundle of the day 
and he’ll have around half an hour to make an impact on this game. Amla starts 
by clipping him for two and then one on the leg side. He’s only got the one 
slip in place, Siddle, and the Australian viewing balcony is just as spartan 
with team manager Gavin Dovey tapping away at a laptop and an unsmiling Craig 
McDermott motionless behind him. It’s nothing like England’s arsenal of 
analysts, anyway.

Updated at 12.57pm GMT

12.42pm GMT 

9th over: South Africa 35-1 (Elgar 13, Amla 7)

Johnson’s first burst now over, Lyon enters the fray in the ninth over and 
sprints through it perhaps a little too quickly. It’s my one remaining knock on 
his bowling actually. He really could afford to slow things down a little 
between deliveries.

12.39pm GMT 

8th over: South Africa 34-1 (Elgar 13, Amla 6)

Proving me more or less wrong in a flash, Elgar plays a quite wonderful late 
cut for a boundary when Harris sends a half-tracker wide of off stump. He 
reminds me a bit of Ed Cowan actually and unlike most people, I intend that as 
a compliment. He’s ungainly but effective in blunting the impact of the new 
ball.

Updated at 12.41pm GMT

12.35pm GMT 

7th over: South Africa 30-1 (Elgar 9, Amla 6)

With Johnson steaming in, Dean Elgar is full of intent with an uppish pull 
shot but his timing is typically askew, but he gets enough on it so that the 
ball plugs in the out-field for three. Amla finishes the over with a boundary 
through gully, which came from the thick edge of his defensive prod. Johnson is 
full of advice for Amla and seemingly anyone else within a 50 metre radius.

It also appears that JOHN STARBUCK is actually john starbuck, and only my 
computer has a problem with his name. “I can’t understand it. You’re the only 
person, it seems, who receives my name in caps. I got a polite email back from 
Geoff Lemon about my recommendation of ‘Speak, old parrot’ by Danny Abse, which 
contains a poem about a cricket bat, and he didn’t mention any problems. Nor 
did Scott this morning.”

Why doesn’t anyone send me poems? I’m a sensitive type too, I swear. 

12.29pm GMT 

6th over: South Africa 21-1 (Elgar 5, Amla 1)

More tech updates from Johns Bains who says, “Great tip for the radio coverage 
on ABC Australia. To help with your new-found technical consultancy, I’m 
watching on SkyGo which does not have the benefit of the Red Button option.”

While we’re at it can anyone recommend the best way, from both a software and 
hardware point of view, that I can convert VHS tapes into digital files that I 
may or may not be wanting to upload to a certain video sharing website? And 
before you ask, yes, it’s porn.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> porn.

In the meantime Ryan Harris, frequent star of top shelf cricket porn himself, 
bowls the kind of tidy maiden that you wouldn’t necessarily pay $12.95 per 
month for.

12.25pm GMT 

5th over: South Africa 21-1 (Elgar 5, Amla 1)

Amla does enter the innings at three and quite surprisingly so. He’s pinching 
a single to get off the mark and as he does so, I see from the replay that 
Johnson’s wicket celebration was actually much wordier than mere grunting. They 
really don’t like the South African skipper, never have. After Elgar rides a 
bouncer quite effectively, Johnson looks to give him a spray as well but it 
falls on deaf ears and a turned back. Elgar looks like the kind of player who 
has been told he’s rubbish so often that it has no impact on him, actually. I 
think I like him.

12.21pm GMT 

WICKET! Smith b Johnson 14 (South Africa 20-1)

Graeme Smith’s leg stump is now splattered across the turf as Mitchell Johnson 
finally does the right hing by his skipper and draws an inside edge from the 
giant South African. He’s pretty happy with that Johnson, so he marauds down 
the wicket grunting at his deposed foe.

12.19pm GMT 

4th over: South Africa 20-0 (Smith 14, Elgar 5)

Christopher Blunt has an even better suggestion for frustrated UK cricket 
lovers: “re Dan Lucas query on live cricket - it’s live by pressing the red 
button on SS3.” Anyone else wishing to air their technical queries, I will 
operate this OBO as a kind of unconventional IT help desk, without the 
dismissive attitude or withholding complex.

Back in the middle, Elgar nudges an awful-looking single and Smith edges 
streakily for a boundary.

12.16pm GMT 

3rd over: South Africa 14-0 (Smith 9, Elgar 4)

Dean Elgar, probably buoyed by his impressive first innings effort, moves his 
weight into a compact cover drive and Johnson throws his head back in 
frustration as it races to the boundary.

John Goldstein has the same TV issue as Dan and says, “Yes Sky are showing the 
match and it’s bloody annoying. It’s not like they haven’t got 3 other channels 
they could use. Do you know which Aussie radio station is doing the commentary?”

ABC Grandstand are covering it. I am reliably informed that the best way for 
UK residents to access their coverage is via TuneIn Radio.

12.11pm GMT 

2nd over: South Africa 8-0 (Smith 8, Elgar 0)

Ryan Harris starts just as unspectacularly as Johnson, dragging one short and 
conceding two as Smith cuts late. The bowler doesn’t quite hit his straps early 
and faces further frustration with both batsman making him wait at the top of 
his mark. The umpires might step in on this issue soon because the Aussies are 
making a lot of noise about the tactic.

Despite my ribbing about his email account capitalisation, JOHN STARBUCK is 
back and says, “After deciding whether or not to insert the opposition, I 
reckon enforcing the follow-on or not is the riskiest thing for a captain. 
Fortunately for Smith he doesn’t have to decide this time, but it’s a nice 
position to be in. The problems of deciding which bowlers and fields to use 
depend on how much of a world-class side you have, when the trick lies in 
keeping them all happy. Both Smith and Clarke seem to be quite good at that.”

You don’t want to flog your assets JOHN, that much is true. Hang on, that 
doesn’t sound quite right...

12.06pm GMT 

1st over: South Africa 5-0 (Smith 4, Elgar 0)

Unusually, Johnson actually takes the new ball in a literal sense and will 
bowl the first over. There’s quite a feisty exchange between Smith and Clark 
(the latter does most of the talking, to be honest) after the Proteas skipper 
stops Johnson in his run so that the band can finish the national anthem. Once 
Johnson finally releases the first delivery it’s dispatched off Smith’s pads 
for a boundary.

He let his captain down a little there, Johnson. Clarke would have wanted that 
up around the throat of his opposite number but the bowler erred.

Niche 90s cricket gags anyone?
Daniel Brettig (@danbrettig) 
To win this game, Aust need to find their own personal Adam Bacher #SAvAUS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SAvAUS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/danbrettig/statuses/437195136624517120> February 22, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/danbrettig/statuses/437195136624517120> 
11.55am GMT 

Australia all out for 246

What else happened in that final over for Australia? Siddle scooped Morkel 
over mid-on for a near-boundary with the kind of stroke more commonly seen in a 
senior’s division tennis match. Harris then flicked Morkel off his pads and was 
beginning to look every bit the all-rounder that he started his first-class 
career as before his dismissal.

It’s well below par from the Aussies but they also know that their opposition 
are currently walking wounded, with paceman Wayne Parnell hobbled and Hashim 
Amla’s ability to even hold a cricket bat now compromised. South Africa won’t 
go in all guns blazing with the bat but should be wary of the impending weather 
threat on Day 5. They hold a 177-run lead but further twists and turns may yet 
await.

11.51am GMT 

WICKET Harris c du Plessis b Morkel 26 (Australia all out for 246)

Harris goes for one boundary too many, sending a thick edge to second slip 
after trying to crash Morkel through cover. An entertaining a profitable 37-run 
10th wicket partnership comes to an end.

11.47am GMT 

56th over: Australia 238-9 (Harris 21, Siddle 8)

Smith has had enough of Philander’s half-trackers so brings Dale Steyn back 
into the attack to finish off the Australian innings. He’s jagging the ball 
back alarmingly off the seam and goes narrowly short of relieving Siddle of his 
off stump.

Is this really what is happening over there in the UK?
Dan Lucas (@DanLucas86) 
Anyone know why Sky Sports are showing U19s cricket instead of the Test Match?
 <https://twitter.com/DanLucas86/statuses/437189544535154688> February 22, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/DanLucas86/statuses/437189544535154688> 
Updated at 12.00pm GMT

11.41am GMT 

55th over: Australia 235-9 (Harris 20, Siddle 7)

Sensing Harris’s will to get on with things, the ever-defensive Smith removes 
one of Morkel’s slips and stations him at third man for the wild top edge. 
Morkel responds by bowling a kind of reverse Harmison, which shoots away down 
the leg side on the full and is only stopped from racing away for four byes by 
the athletic lunge of AB de Villiers.

He’d been coming around the wicket, Morkel, which quite unnecessarily limited 
his potential modes of dismissing the tailenders. At Smith’s insistence, he 
shifts back over the wicket. Siddle remains calm through the upheaval and pats 
away a valuable boundary from the final delivery of the over.

11.36am GMT 

54th over: Australia 228-9 (Harris 20, Siddle 2)

What a way to avoid the follow on; Philander’s blood-lust has possibly been 
triggered by the sight of Morkel’s rib-rattlers and he’s digging in too short 
to Harris, who mightily thumps him for another cross-batted boundary to the leg 
side. This time it’s a six. Less emphatic is a late cut that races past gully 
for four, but Harris is doing the trick here late in the Australian innings.

His teammates are unmoved in the sheds and cutting a very glum figure indeed. 

11.32am GMT 

53rd over: Australia 218-9 (Harris 10, Siddle 2)

 Morkel is bowling with some serious wheels here, as his contemporaries might 
say. He’s nudging the 150 kmph mark and mostly attempting to bounce them off 
the helmets of this Australian pair. After the review, which came from a short 
one directed at Siddle’s ribs, he’s again hemming the number eleven back and 
nearly forcing him to bunt a catch to square leg.

11.30am GMT 

NOT OUT!

It was worth a try with only one wicket remaining, but no dice for Morkel.

11.30am GMT 

REVIEW!

Morkel is urged into a more spirited appeal for a caught behind dismissal down 
the leg side to Siddle but it doesn’t look like there’s much in it.

11.26am GMT 

52nd over: Australia 216-9 (Harris 9, Siddle 1)

“I like to see men charging in bowling fast,” says Michael Holding. He makes 
another valid point too, noting that genuinely fast bowlers don’t physically 
last for long so we need to enjoy them when they come along. Personally I’m 
loving this intimidatory bowling. It’s nothing worse than the Aussies would 
dish out themselves.


Harris has seen enough of Philander to know that the best form of 
self-preservation is attack, so he artlessly swats him wide of mid-on for a 
boundary.

Updated at 11.34am GMT

11.21am GMT 

51st over: Australia 210-9 (Harris 4, Siddle 0)

Morkel is doing his best to morph into a right-handed Johnson here, roughing 
up the number eleven Siddle with some short stuff. Lots of it.

Fred Hatman is probably loving that because a mere matter of minutes ago he 
emailed in to say, “I’m doing my darndest to be civilised here but that 
“badge-ball” from Morne which landed on Mitch’s bonce had the whole of SA 
behind it and symbolises some pay-back, not only for Johnson’s impudence in 
bowling quite nastily at SuperSport Park but also for the rank untoward conduct 
of his team-mates during the Ashes. They like it hard, they get it hard. I’m 
loving this Test match.”

I’m not saying sledging or bouncers are great for the image of the game, but I 
enjoy watching both to be totally honest. Am I a bad person?

11.16am GMT 

WICKET! Smith c de Villiers b Morkel 49 (Australia 209-9)

Smith is gone. The snicko reading wasn’t exactly conclusive and hot spot was 
as useful as the ICC, but Aleem Dar thinks he’s seen enough to give it out. He 
took a while and the decision prompts an angry shake of the head from Aussie 
skipper Michael Clarke, but Smith has to go. To the naked eye it looked out, 
but I’m not sure the prosecution had enough evidence for a conviction there.

11.13am GMT 

REVIEW!

Graeme Smith has gone hard and gone early with his review call here. He thinks 
that Morkel has Smith caught behind and the vision says he might be right.

11.11am GMT 

50th over: Australia 209-8 (Smith 49, Harris 4)

And we’re back. Ryan Harris is the new batsman and he starts in style, 
flogging Duminy’s half-tracker past square leg for a boundary. He’s a capable 
batsman, Harris. Smith is going to need him to stick around if the Aussies are 
going to drag themselves back into this game.

11.05am GMT 

Day Five Prognostications

This is interesting for two reasons. First and foremost, it may influence the 
kind of target South Africa sets the Aussies. Secondly....spoiler alert...Rob 
Smyth is due in these environs on Day 5 and it will be he who has to 
potentially fill the dead air. That could actually be fun. More fun than 
Australia losing, slightly less fun than a miraculous comeback.
Neil Manthorp (@NeilManthorp) 
Wonder if Proteas are aware of the appalling weather forecast for Monday. 50mm 
of rain predicted in PE!
 <https://twitter.com/NeilManthorp/statuses/437180102372503552> February 22, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/NeilManthorp/statuses/437180102372503552> 
10.57am GMT 

Mark Waugh update

Mark Waugh is getting wistful about Wayne Rooney’s weekly salary on the Fox 
Sports panel. I love it when he gets going about modern player wages. It 
clearly irks him that he wasn’t around for T20 gravy train.

Less amusing is the sight of Damien Martyn being dismissed by Allan Donald in 
the Sydney Test of the 1993-94 Australian home series, which Fox have just cut 
to in an apparent attempt to further curse Australia in this game. Ergh, 
they’re even showing the bit where the Proteas players carry Fanie de Villiers 
off the ground on their shoulders.

I’d be all for AB de Villiers being chaired off though. At the end of every 
game.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEwioYsFVo8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEwioYsFVo8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEwioYsFVo8&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEwioYsFVo8&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEwioYsFVo8>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEwioYsFVo8&media=>
close  Australia v South Africa, 1993-94, Sydney Test. 
10.46am GMT 

This is how badly Australia are doing this morning

Cricket Australia have just started ignoring the Test in order to focus on the 
positives, like Ben Hilfenhaus taking a hat-trick in the Shield. He’ll still 
probably remain stranded for eternity on 99 Test wickets though, the poor bloke.
CA Digital Media (@CricketAus) 
If you missed it earlier, check out Hilfy's hat-trick in our recap of the 
#TASvQLD <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TASvQLD&src=hash> Shield clash: 
http://t.co/x8gWX71MYp <http://t.co/x8gWX71MYp> #BupaSS 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23BupaSS&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/CricketAus/statuses/437175259771305984> February 22, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/CricketAus/statuses/437175259771305984> 
10.42am GMT 

Urgh...

It’s appropriate that Bill Hicks currently appears in the corner of your 
screen because some of those Australian dismissals this morning were pure 
comedy. Was Mitchell Johnson actually playing for spin from JP Duminy? If so 
the compliment backfired. The specialist batsmen merely misfired, with Steve 
Smith now left to carry the can and try to drag Australia beyond the follow-on 
target.

Will Graeme Smith even enforce it? Probably not. As Scott said, I am indeed 
Russell Jackson and you can contact me on 
russell.jackson.casual@theguardian.com with all of your observations, 
conspiracy theories, Ponzi schemes and baseless rumours about Graeme Smith.

10.33am GMT 

And that, indeed, is the lunch break

South Africa continue where they left off the previous day, worrying 
Australia’s batsmen with sincere and aggressive fast bowling.

Four more wickets in the session, and admittedly a fair few more runs for 
Australia, but South Africa remain clearly in the ascendancy and it will 
require some effort from Australia to get something out of this Test.

It’s been a pleasure keeping you company. I now hand you over to Russell 
Jackson for the afternoon session.

10.29am GMT 

Wicket! Johnson b Duminy 27 (Australia 205-8)

Johnson plays all around a straight one from Duminy and is bowled, South 
Africa striking on the stroke of lunch to underline their authority.

10.27am GMT 

49th over: Australia 204-7 (Smith 48, Johnson 27)

Smiles and laughs (in the crowd) all round as Morkel buries a short one into 
the ribs of Johnson. You give it, you get it. And no complaints from Mitch.

The mercury rises even further next ball as a straight, fast bouncer hits 
Johnson on the helmet en route to the keeper. South Africa’s convinced they 
have him caught behind, but, no, it was all helmet.

Fiery stuff from Morkel. Johnson takes the roughing up in his stride. That’s 
good crikeet, is that.

Here’s Ned Hurley: “A stadium with a ‘duck pond end’ and the band in 
attendance playing ‘Because I Got High’ by Afroman ... only in South Africa.”

10.20am GMT 

48th over: Australia 202-7 (Smith 47, Johnson 26)

More runs to Johnson, who collects three off Duminy to third man to take 
Australia past 200.

10.15am GMT 

47th over: Australia 199-7 (Smith 47, Johnson 23)

Morkel back on now for Steyn, who must be shagged after putting has back, and 
someone else’s into a great spell of fast bowling.

Smith gets a bit of luck as one that seems to keep a bit low splits keeper and 
slip to earn four more.

10.12am GMT 

46th over: Australia 195-7 (Smith 43, Johnson 23)

Duminy continues his spell but to little effect, Johnson latching onto a 
fuller one and sending it down the ground for four.

Mitch follows that up with a nice six to the same part of the ground.

Australia continue to score quickly, and crucially with Parnell off the ground 
with a suspected groin injury.

10.09am GMT 

45th over: Australia 184-7 (Smith 42, Johnson 13)

More devilish reverse swing from Steyn. Smith really just looks to survive, 
ensuring he doesn’t leave a gaping hole between bat and pad as Haddin did.

Steyn ends the over with a horrid half-volley to Johnson, who is plenty good 
enough to send it racing to the long-off fence.

10.05am GMT 

44th over: Australia 175-7 (Smith 40, Johnson 6)

Four runs to Johnson, who gleefully does away with Duminy’s half-volley.

Gervase Greene email this prior to John Starbuck’s comment in the 38th over 
about the follow-on, and seeing as he sent it to the wrong email address I 
reckon it’s worth publishing now, as in some kind of way he’d beaten JB to the 
punch: “We are about to see it now- history’s awful burden. I am not sure when 
it will end, but clearly it has a way to go yet. I call it the VVS Laxman 
factor: Teams who are more than 300 ahead have a fit of funk, still terrified 
to give away a critical advantage and actually, shockingly send back in to bat 
a team that barely managed to make half that in the day just gone.”

Updated at 10.14am GMT

10.00am GMT 

43rd over: Australia 171-7 (Smith 40, Johnson 2)

Smith keeps his shots in the locker against a probing Steyn, whose reverse 
swing is presenting a clear and present danger.

Oh, and here’s the carnage of Haddin’s dismissal at the bloodied hands of the 
brutal Steyn. I speak figuratively. He’s actually a lovely bloke who takes 
great pride in the cleanliness of all his extremities.

9.56am GMT 

42nd over: Australia 171-7 (Smith 40, Johnson 2)

Duminy comes on for a spin. A single to Smith is the only event to get 
remotely excited about.

9.53am GMT 

41st over: Australia 170-7 (Smith 39, Johnson 2)

Johnson gets off the mark with two runs off Steyn backward of point, but it 
could easily have been out with the left-hander squared up and largely 
clueless. Wonderful bowling from Steyn.

9.51am GMT 

Wicket! Haddin b Steyn 9 (Australia 168-7)

Steyn traps Haddin on the crease and rises in appeal like a man possessed. 
Gotta be out, right? No, the decision is not out and there is no referral from 
the Proteas, the ball (rightly) thought to be heading down leg.

But later in the over Steyn gets his man, swinging one in through Haddin’s 
defences and taking out the stumps. High quality fast bowling. If Australia 
weren’t reeling already, they are now.

9.44am GMT 

40th over: Australia 168-6 (Smith 39, Haddin 9)

Haddin takes it really, really casually on his second run and is lucky to 
survive as Steyn’s shy at the stumps from the deep just misses. Would have been 
clearly out.

Meanwhile, Parnell leaves the field, grabbing his groin and/or hamstring. 
Doesn’t look good for him. Elgar completes his over.

9.40am GMT 

39th over: Australia 165-6 (Smith 39, Haddin 6)

Refreshed, Smith continues his free-scoring ways, steering Steyn wide of 
second slip for four more ... and then four more driven wide of mid-on. That’s 
seven boundaries already for the in-form right-hander, and just the kind of 
counter-attacking Australia need right now.

9.35am GMT 

38th over: Australia 157-6 (Smith 31, Haddin 6)

Another four to Smith, who beats mid-on with a nicely timed stroke.

Time for drinks. Amla, meanwhile, is receiving treatment for a dislocated 
finger sustained in the catch he spilled to reprieve Haddin in the 32nd over.

Hello to John Starbuck: “Can I be first to mention the phrase ‘the follow-on’ 
please?”

Not there yet, John. Would Smith enforce it , is the question. I’d say no.

Updated at 9.39am GMT

9.29am GMT 

37th over: Australia 150-6 (Smith 25, Haddin 5)

Dropped catch! Smith middles one off Steyn straight to sub fielder Peterson at 
square leg. Really a simple opportunity, but again South Africa’s catching lets 
the team down.

Australia would’ve been seven down with clean hands. Not getting a wicket, 
just when you want a wicket: that would be ironic if your name was Alanis 
Morissette.

Updated at 9.31am GMT

9.23am GMT 

36th over: Australia 149-6 (Smith 24, Haddin 5)

A double change sees Parnell brought on to replace Philander. More runs for 
Smith, this time three backward of square.

Updated at 9.26am GMT

9.18am GMT 

35th over: Australia 146-6 (Smith 21, Haddin 5)

Steyn is brought on for his first bowl of the day, hitting the sweet spot 
instantly with a couple of deliveries that beat Haddin, one nipping back, the 
other seaming away from the batsman.

As if to emphasise his arrival, not least his class, Steyn then gets a couple 
to reverse swing into the right-hander.

9.15am GMT 

34th over: Australia 146-6 (Smith 21, Haddin 5)

Yet another boundary to Smith, who cashes in on a rare bad ball from 
Philander, a half-volley outside off-stump, before picking up another four, all 
run, at the end of the over through mid-wicket.

Thankfully for Australia’s sake, Smith is looking in great touch.

9.09am GMT 

33rd over: Australia 138-6 (Smith 13, Haddin 5)

More of the same from Morkel, around the wicket: short, sharp and quite 
vicious. Smith holds his ground, and his nerve, even picking up a single to 
fine leg. Haddin gets on strike and opts simply to get under the bouncer.

9.05am GMT 

32nd over: Australia 137-6 (Smith 12, Haddin 5)

Good line from Philander has Haddin in two minds as the No.7 (well, No.8 
today) edges with soft hands, the ball landing well in front of slip.

Later in the over, he goes much harder at one and gets a thick edge that flies 
above head height to gully - and through the hands of Amla, who must’ve got a 
finger to it as he’s left the field for treatment, presumably.

In a harsh world, that’s a dropped catch.

9.00am GMT 

31st over: Australia 133-6 (Smith 12, Haddin 1)

Haddin gets off the mark with a single before Smith helps himself to another 
boundary, a delightful clip off Morkel forward of square.

8.57am GMT 

Wicket! Lyon b Morkel 15 (Australia 128-6)

Lyon gives himself room but Morkel follows him and the nightwatchman’s cramped 
fend deflects onto the stumps, meaning he’s out for the first time since Jesus 
batted first drop for the Nazareth 1st XI, and Australia are six down and even 
deeper in the brown stuff.

8.54am GMT 

30th over: Australia 128-5 (Lyon 15, Smith 8)

Philander gifts Smith a couple of nerve-settlers, straying twice down the leg 
side to concede consecutive glanced boundaries.

8.52am GMT 

Wicket! Warner c Smith b Philander 70 (Australia 120-5)

Philander temps Warner with a wide one and, if indeed it was a ploy, it works 
a treat, the opener going hard at the drive but succeeding only in edging to 
Smith at first slip.

Big breakthrough for South Africa. Steve Smith enters the fray with a mountain 
to climb. At least he’s in form.

8.49am GMT 

29th over: Australia 120-4 (Warner 70, Lyon 15)

More anxious moments for Lyon as Morkel maintains his rage against the 
nightwatchman. The batsman keeps his life, and wicket, intact, even surviving a 
hearty shout for caught behind.

8.44am GMT 

28th over: Australia 119-4 (Warner 69, Lyon 15)

Philander raps Lyon on the pads, the ball heading way down leg, and rises in 
appeal for lbw, which in pre-DRS days would have been worth the energy spent.

These days, however, why go to the bother?

8.39am GMT 

27th over: Australia 117-4 (Warner 69, Lyon 13)

Lyon wears a short one from Morkel on the left armpit - really, ouch - but he 
who seems immovable shrugs it all aside and even takes a single off the last 
ball of the over to keep the strike.

That, and Mel Gibson at the end of Braveheart, is bravery.

Updated at 8.44am GMT

8.35am GMT 

26th over: Australia 116-4 (Warner 69, Lyon 12)

Philander is a bit loose in his first over of the day, just a little, and 
Warner helps himself to a few cheap runs either side of the wicket.

An announcement blares around the ground advising people to keep an eye on 
their children. Entirely agree.

8.30am GMT 

You've been Warnered

Will Warner make South Africa pay for AB de Villiers’s almost comical drop 
late on day two?

Maybe.

AB shouldn’t feel too bad. At least he isn’t Geraint Jones.

8.17am GMT 

Breathe in, breathe out

Top of the [insert your relevant time of day here] to you.

Australia’s in a spot of strife for the first time this tour and, four down, 
it will be fascinating to see how they respond against a South Africa attack 
with tails in the air and bowling to a total.

But this isn’t a foreign scenario for Australia in recent times. Four down for 
not many was an occurrence oft experienced in the Ashes, and look what happened 
there.

I’m Scott Heinrich and I suggest Australia doesn’t forget to breathe, just as 
Mr Miyagi, who would have handled Johnson, Morkel and co with aplomb, would say.

12.33am GMT 

Scott will be here presently, in the meantime why not read an extract from 
this week’s Spin:

Russell Domingo, South Africa’s coach, never played first-class cricket. But 
he is a whizz with numbers. “I am,”Domingo told Firdose Moonda <http:>, “very 
driven by technical and strategic aspects and analysis.” AB de Villiers says of 
Domingo: “He likes his stats.” No doubt, then, that his team thought they were 
well-prepared. Hashim Amla said before the first Test with Australia: “I don’t 
think in this series there’s too many surprise factors.”Mitchell Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>? “We’ve played against him 
before,” said Faf du Plessis. “It’s nothing we haven’t seen … we’re ready.” All 
Australia’s talk, Graeme Smith said, was just so much “bull”. South Africa’s 
batsmen had their plans, ones based on experience and analysis. “Everyone has a 
plan,” as Mike Tyson put it, “’til they get punched in the mouth.”

At 85mph, a ball takes 0.52sec to travel 22 yards. That’s less time than it 
takes Usain Bolt to complete his first stride, and a little more than it takes 
you to blink. It’s how long a batsman has to spot the length and line of the 
delivery, pick a shot to play, and then pull it off. To do it right, he needs 
to judge the position of the ball to within around three centimetres, and time 
the arrival of the bat to within three milliseconds. Any further, any sooner, 
any slower, and the ball misses the sweet spot. Put like that, hitting a 
cricket ball begins to seem like a preternatural act, as impossible as pinching 
a fly from the air with a pair of chopsticks.
 