
Last night, as darkness fell and the lights went out in businesses and 
households across Britain in remembrance of the outbreak of the first world 
war, a huge pillar of white light pierced the night sky above London, its 
brightness so intense that it could be seen over 12 miles away.

For those who happened to be passing Victoria Tower Gardens 
<https://plus.google.com/101617248397732073595/about?gl=uk&hl=en>, a swath of 
green adjacent to the Houses of Parliament, the sense of wonder and 
disorientation was immediate and powerful, with the surrounding trees and 
buildings bathed in a glow emanating from the base of the pillar of light: 
a square of black matting on which 49 powerful spotlights beamed upwards as if 
into infinity.

The work, called spectra, is by Japanese sound and light artist Ryoji Ikeda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/oct/09/ryoji.ikeda.lelaboratoire.paris>
, a quiet, self-contained young man whose vision is both minimalist and 
monumental. It's produced by the ever-adventurousArtangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>, which brought you, among 
other projects, Rachel Whiteread's inside-out house in 1993, and Jem Finer's 
1,000 year sound project, Longplayer, in 2000. Spectra was commissioned by the 
Mayor of London and14-18 NOW <http://www.1418now.org.uk/> (WW1 Centenary Art 
Commissions) as the centrepiece of its artistic commemoration of the start of 
the war. "The light spectra throws up into the night sky is a unifying point," 
saysBoris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>. "It echoes how 
the first world war affected all Londoners, but also how they and the rest of 
the country came together, standing united during those dark days."

Spectra will appear from darkness to dawn over the next seven days, and people 
are encouraged to visit the site and interact with the project by walking 
though the grid of spotlights, arranged in seven rows of seven. Ikeda has also 
created an ambient soundtrack to enhance the experience: waves of subsonic 
sound punctuated by beeps and hisses, emanating from four sets of speakers 
pointing inwards towards the light. It's as if an alien craft is beaming down 
to a soundtrack byBrian Eno <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brianeno>.

The 15km-high tower of light is the culmination of eight months of preparation 
and secrecy. When I was told about it a month ago, I joined an elect group that 
includedArtangel <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>, the 
artist and his crew, as well as the mayor and select members of the House of 
Lords and the Royal Parks. "It is different to anything else we have 
commissioned on two counts," Artangel's co-directer, Michael Morris, explained 
as I walked around the site with him and Ikeda last week, while men in luminous 
jackets laid cables and fretted about the hot sunlight expanding the black 
matting beneath our feet. "It is a work that will announce itself without any 
of the usual PR fanfare," he added, "and it is a work that already exists, 
insofar as it has been staged in various forms in several cities including 
Barcelona and Amsterdam. But this time, the context is very different because 
of the centenary of the first world war. My sense is that, on the first few 
nights, there will be a sense of reverence at the site. But then, as the 
numbers of people increase towards the weekend, it will no doubt take on a life 
of its own."
 Ryoji Ikeda's Spectra being tested in Victoria Tower Gardens, London. 
Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris for The Guardian 
Ikeda, who exudes a focused calm throughout the preparations, nods. "When you 
experience it," he says, "any kind of context is suddenly gone. From a 
distance, it looks monumental and solid, but when you are in it, it is entirely 
meditative. People stare up in wonder. It causes necks to strain. The 
experience is so pure and direct, they can take it with them into their own 
life." Or project their own imaginings on to it – as when it was shown in 
Barcelona and hundreds of people phoned the police in a panic. "They were 
convinced it was a UFO landing," says Ikeda, grinning, "or a light from heaven."

I visited the site again just before midnight on Sunday, when Ikeda and his 
technical crew had gathered for a rehearsal: a 10-minute trial run in which 
each spotlight was switched on and focused individually. For Morris and his 
Artangel co-director James Lingwood, who had brought along the British artist
Jeremy Deller <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jeremy-deller>, this 
was the most nerve-wracking moment of the entire project, not just because of 
the very real possibility of a technical hitch, but also the threat of a surge 
of social-media interest prompted by passersby with their smartphones and 
Instagram accounts.

"There is no way around it," Ikeda told me calmly. "It has to be tested, and 
it will take whatever time it takes to make the necessary adjustments. This is 
usually one minute per spotlight." Morris nodded nervously. "That's 49 minutes, 
Ryoji," he said. "Ten would be much better." So, just after midnight, the 
security light that had glared over the site, making the rows of encased 
spotlights look like metal gravestones, was turned off. As our eyes adjusted 
and two figures moved around the grid, the beams appeared one by one, then row 
by row, shooting silently up into the sky to a collective exhalation of breath. 
Ten minutes was all it took.

Tentatively, I wandered through the grid, while ominous waves of sound washed 
over me. It felt threatening at first, but then, as I surrendered to the 
immersive nature of the project, oddly calming. The first thing you realise is 
that, for such a static, minimal piece, spectra is a living, constantly 
changing entity: dramatic and subtle, geometric and shape-shifting, opaque and 
yet somehow solid. Standing close to the middle, I looked up, and all 49 
pillars of light seemed to converge at a point somewhere high above my head. 
Just how high was impossible to tell – distance, like perspective, is 
distorted. A few steps sideways and the geometric pattern shifted and lost its 
symmetry. Positioning myself at a corner, I looked up at what seemed to be a 
single wall of whiter light that split the grid diagonally. On cue, a splat and 
hiss of shrill sound suggested a fissure of some kind.

The further back you go from the base, the taller and more solid it seems, as 
the thin beams become one. Across London, on elevated points like Primrose Hill 
or Crystal Palace, it looks like one single shaft of white light touching 
infinity somewhere high above the earth – one can only sense its epic reach on 
a cloudless night. A few minutes into the trial, spectra came alive in an 
entirely different way as moths and flies flickered in and out of the light, 
and condensation rose off the spotlights like dry ice. "A bit Pink Floyd, 
that," said Deller. One can indeed imagine devotees of Meddle-era Floyd making 
a deep connection with the ambient soundtrack and flickering towers of light.
 A long-distance view of Spectra. Photograph: William Eckersley 
The history and logistics of spectra are intriguing. In Paris in 2008, it 
comprised a grid of 64 spotlights; in Amsterdam that same year, 25 spotlights 
pierced the sky at four different sites; in Buenos Aires in 2012, it took the 
form of a 100m-long linear projection. Ikeda has now settled on the 7x7 
formation, which requires a crew of about 30 technicians, many from the 
Paris-based Skylight company, who designed and installed the spotlights that 
illuminate the Eiffel tower. It runs off four generators fuelled by biodiesel 
and, according to Ikeda, "each spotlight is four kilowatts, so over the seven 
days, its total energy consumption will be equivalent to 10 to 20 households."

For the next seven nights, spectra will become possibly the single most-viewed 
work of conceptual art ever, given that it will be hard for anyone living in 
London not to see it. And, as the weather changes, so will the nature of the 
light. "I would kind of like it to rain," says Ikeda, "because then the 
rainbows will appear inside it – and people like that." If it were to rain 
heavily, he adds, "it will become a bit moreBlade Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/blade-runner> – needles of rain like steel 
falling upwards. Nature is visible all the time in the work. That is spectra's 
real power."

Last night, though, its power was more sombre: a vast tower of light pointing 
to the heavens in contrast to the single flickering candle left burning on the 
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Westminster Abbey. The humble and the 
monumental, each in their own way, encouraging a sense of reflection and 
reminding us of that dark moment 100 years ago when, as the British foreign 
secretary Edward Grey famously remarked: "The lamps are going out all over 
Europe – we shall not see them lit again in our lifetime."
 