
Egypt last night became the most successful side in African history, winning a 
record fifth Cup of Nations with a penalty shoot-out victory over Ivory Coast. 
Didier Drogba was the first of two Ivorians to have their penalties saved by 
the Egyptian keeper Essam El Hadary. By the end the Cairo International Stadium 
was throbbing with excitement, as it had been for three weeks, but for periods 
the Ivorians reduced the crowd to subdued introspection, not least when Ahmed 
Hassan missed an extra-time penalty.

The atmosphere in this competition is generally recognised as having played a 
key part in Egypt's progression to the final but where there was immense desire 
for success there was also the potential to induce neurosis. Certainly there 
was an edginess about Amr Zaki, preferred over the veteran Hossam Hassan as a 
replacement for Mido.

Mido, after a televised handshake with his coach on Thursday, remained 
suspended for his outburst after his substitution in the semi-final but was 
sufficiently reconciled with the federation to take a seat in the stand, where 
he spent most of the game nervously chewing his thumb. That was symptomatic of 
a more general tension as Ivory Coast's hard pres-sing threatened to overwhelm 
the hosts.

The Ivorian forward Bonaventure Kalou had called for the referee, the 
controversial Mourad Daami, who was once suspended for 12 months for attempting 
to influence the decision of another official while acting as a delegate for 
the Tunisian club Esperance, to be strong in the face of the home support and, 
in the event, he seemed admirably phlegmatic. As early as the second minute a 
clash involving Gauthier Akale had the fans baying for a red card but Daami 
showed merely a yellow.

He then disallowed an Egyptian goal with seven minutes remaining, correctly 
ruling after Amr had finally scrambled a rebound over the line that Mohamed 
Shawki had been in an offside position as Ahmed Hassan fired in the initial 
shot.

By that stage Ivory Coast were on top. Indeed by the hour-mark they could 
consider the first part of their game plan complete, as frustrated jeers for 
the first time rolled form the stands. Ivory Coast could have had the goal they 
needed with 13 minutes left but, after Arouna Kone had worked an opening on the 
right, Didier Drogba spooned over from six yards.

It is a miss that will haunt him and he compounded the error in the penalty 
shoot-out as his kick was saved by Essam El Hadary. Abdel Halim put his kick 
wide but Hadary immediately saved from Bakari Kone to preserve Egypt's 
advantage, leaving Abou Terika, arguably the player of the tournament, to 
convert the decisive kick.
 