
It's late afternoon and the sultry heat of the day is beginning to diminish. 
Young people circle the plaza on scooters, eyeing each other up as they cross 
paths. Oblivious to the sexual tension, a sloth – the most leisurely of 
tropical creatures – surveys the scene from a tree in the middle of the square 
while chewing slowly on a leaf.

Trinidad, in Bolivia's north-eastern lowlands, not far from the border with 
Brazil, feels a million miles away from the Andean culture that dominates the 
South American country's politics and culture. Capital of the province of Beni, 
Trinidad sits on the banks of the Marmoré, in an area of vast wetlands, jungles 
and rivers that flow into the Amazon further north. And the star resident of 
these waters is thebufeo, a beautiful pinky-grey river dolphin.

There are several varieties of South American river dolphin, the best- known 
being the pinkboutu, a popular draw on Amazon river trips in Brazil. Their less 
startlingly pink Bolivian cousin was formally discovered by French naturalist 
Alcide d'Orbigny in 1832: he named itinia boliviensis, borrowing inia from the 
word he'd heard indigenous people use. Like many facets of life here, the 
creature comes cloaked in myth. When a handsome stranger appears at a local 
fiesta, he is said to be thebufeo in human form – dancing all night long and 
seducing women.
 Trinidad town in the Bolivian lowlands. Photograph: Ed Stocker 
The beauty of this wilderness is that tourism is in its infancy here: you'll 
share your dolphin sightings with relatively few outside visitors. Some miles 
west of town, at Puerto Ballivián on the Ibare river (a tributary of the 
Marmoré), is a settlement of wooden houses on stilts at the edge of the jungle. 
We're doing a day cruise, within a 25,000-hectare reserve, to spot the 
dolphins, which are unique to the area and protected under law since 2012.

At the helm of our little motorboat is Roger, a fiftysomething local with 
salt-and-pepper hair and a broad grin. As we chug down river, he points out 
tarope plants growing in the water which, he says, act as a natural filter.

"It's clean here," he adds, "but the biggest threat to the dolphin is 
contamination near urban centres."

We spot a pair of parabas – gold-and-blue parrots – in the trees and hear the 
thunderous roar of a group of elusive monkeys in the distance. But the dolphin 
is the star attraction.

The first one we spot teases us, revealing just parts of its body, from the 
blowhole and beak to a flipper. We play a leisurely game of cat-and-mouse, 
spotting it in the distance, edging nearer and then watching it disappear, only 
to surface again further away moments later. Sightings are almost guaranteed 
here: there are plenty of bufeos in this part of the river, and there's 
something mesmerising about the graceful way the dolphin, one of several we 
see, glides just below the water's surface.
 The dolphin-spotting boat on the Ibare river. Photograph: Ed Stocker 
While spotting a dolphin in the water is pretty much a given, how much you'll 
see of them – and whether they'll jump out of the water – depends on patience 
and luck. But there's plenty to see if they're not playing. The trees are full 
of birds (a mind-boggling number of species), including toucans, rare jacamars 
and herons. Its astonishing to see so many weird and wonderful creatures so 
easily, but that is a major part of Beni's appeal – its untapped feel and sense 
of being in a place few people even know exists.
• The trip was provided by HighLives (020-8144 2629, highlives.co.uk 
<http://highlives.co.uk/>), a South America specialist which has a seven-day 
tour of the Bolivia Lowlands, including the dolphin route, from £1,230pp, 
including transfers but not international flights. Flights were provided by Air 
Europa (0871 423 0717,aireuropa.com <http://www.aireuropa.com>), which flies 
from Gatwick to Santa Cruz via Madrid from £700 return
 