
Dense text and long lists of bullet points aren't appealing if you're a hiring 
manager, swamped by applications and with little time to read every word 
closely. Trendy modernCVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> focus on 
making key details stand out in a concisely written page.

Here are some tips to help you spruce up your CV:

Declutter the content

Take out information that no longer supports your career goals, reclaiming 
valuable space. Old or irrelevant roles can be deleted or grouped together in 
an "additional experience" section to take up less room.

Prune your education section. If you're a graduate, your degree eclipses your 
school qualifications, which can be relegated to one line in most cases. Recent 
training and upskilling might even be more relevant than a degree in some cases.

Make sure your CV contains the information necessary to market you for a role: 
examine the job description to check you're including appropriate keywords. Use 
a range of strong, positive vocabulary, but avoid clichés. Focus instead on 
facts – numbers and results prove your strengths much more effectively.

Remember, your CV is not a complete account of your life to date, but a 
carefully worded summary. Weed out the day-to-day details of job 
responsibilities to create a bigger picture: the scope of your role and your 
most important results.

For example:

ABC Publishing Ltd, Marketing Manager 2007 – 2011
I revitalised marketing campaigns in key regions to increase sales by 25% in 
six months:
• Renegotiated partnership terms with distributors to double profit margins
• Cut promotion costs by 35% through internet and mobile campaigns

Smarten up the layout

Tidy up your contact details. If you've got four lines for your street 
address, town and postcode, phone number, email and LinkedIn profile, adapt 
your format so it takes up less space. You can also save space by summarising 
company details, such as turnover and staff numbers etc, on to one line (see 
the example above).

Use the beginning of your CV to reel in your reader. Instead of a long 
paragraph in a personal profile section, use the title of the job as a heading, 
and then summarise your main selling points in one or two lines under that. 
These can include your areas of expertise, length of experience in the sector, 
a branding statement, or other information that furthers your application.

Choose a font that is easily read on screen, avoiding fonts such as Times New 
Roman, which look dated. You could experiment with font sizes (smaller for 
company details, for example) and use bold to highlight key information, such 
as numbers. Two pages of easy-to-read and visually appealing text is preferable 
to one page of densely packed paragraphs with key information buried.

Long lists of bullet points are not easy on the eye, so limit yourself to 
three or four in any one place and split up long paragraphs. Plenty of white 
space will enhance the readability of your CV. Section headings can also help 
break up the text. To keep things tidy, try to avoidorphans and widows 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Widows_and_orphans> where possible – paying 
attention to space-saving will help you focus on making every word count.

Recycle and repurpose

If you're thinking about changing direction in your career, returning to a 
previous job, or going for a promotion, some of your older experience may now 
be more useful and relevant. Dust off details that support your move, such as 
previous roles, skills, training, projects and achievements.

Be prepared to rework the theme and layout of your CV. You may want to 
re-position older details to make them more prominent, or highlight different 
aspects of your experience to make them appear more relevant for your current 
goals.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and free 
careers ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 