
In 2006, the 84-year-old Kurt Vonnegut wrote a letter to a class of 
schoolchildren 
<http://highexistence.com/make-your-soul-grow-84-year-old-kurt-vonneguts-wonderful-letter-to-a-group-of-high-school-students/>
who had asked him to visit. He was too ill to travel, but offered them instead 
the following lesson for life: “Practise any art, music, singing, dancing, 
acting, drawing, painting, sculpting, poetry, fiction, essays, reportage, not 
to get money and fame, but to experience becoming, to find out what’s inside 
you, to make your soul grow.”

Beautiful advice, certainly; there’s no question that access to art and 
literature, and the opportunity to explore creative expression, can broaden 
young people’s outlook, boost their confidence and encourage empathy and 
curiosity about the wider world. Middle-class parents have always known this; 
it’s why their children are signed up for MiniMozart groups and pre-school 
Mandarin classes before they can walk. Being “cultured” opens doors even if you 
don’t pursue a career in the arts; private schools know this and usually offer 
a rich and varied extracurricular programme of artistic activities. But 
Vonnegut’s exhortation is not so easy to follow for young people who have 
little opportunity or guidance when it comes to the arts.

Schools used to provide those opportunities, often backed up by community 
youth projects. But funding for the latter has shrivelled and state-school 
teachers find their time and resources stretched thinner than ever; many 
schools are simply unable to provide the kind of music tuition, theatre or 
gallery trips and after-school clubs that my state comprehensive offered in the 
1980s. But the greatest worry is that creative writing, art, drama and music, 
once an integral part of the curriculum, are losing their status in favour of 
moreobviously “commercially useful” subjects.

Last week, a survey based on statistics published by Ofqual revealed a 
fivefold decline in the number of pupils taking GCSEs in arts subjects over the 
past year 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/exclusive-arts-schools-plummets-new-figures-show>
, and entrants for A-levels in arts subjects dropped by 4,300 this summer. In a 
straitened economy – and we hardly know yet how much worse that will become – 
arts are increasingly seen as “soft subjects”, despite assurance from the 
education secretary, Nicky Morgan, who said last year that she “firmly 
rejected” the suggestion that the government considered the arts “less 
important”. This was the same Nicky Morgan who warned pupils in 2014 that 
choosing arts over STEM (science, technology, engineering and maths) subjects 
could “hold them back for the rest of their lives”. The statistics suggest that 
this doom-laden prophecy has been taken seriously by the current cohort.

My 14-year-old son chose his GCSE options this year; the fact that the school 
sent an accompanying letter assuring parents that arts subjects would not be 
considered inferior to maths and sciences by the top universities was telling 
in itself. But the structure of the timetable, which allowed only one choice 
between art, music and drama, and none of those if the child also wanted to 
study a second language, hardly seemed to bear that out.

It’s widely feared among arts professionals and teachers that the 
implementation of the EBacc in September, with its narrow range of core 
subjects and absence of the expressive arts, is only likely to exacerbate the 
drop-off. It’s an oddly short-sighted view that has been the subject of reports 
and campaigns by theCreative Industries Federation 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/>, which emphasises the 
contribution of the creative sector to the economy and works to promote the 
potential employment benefits to students choosing arts subjects. Encouraging 
young people to study creative arts to find out what’s inside them is all well 
and good, but it’s also useful to provide figures reassuring them that there 
are jobs at the end of it. On 4 July, parliament will debate the inclusion of 
expressive arts subjects in the Ebacc as the result of a petition started by
Essex drama teacher Richard Wilson <http://www.baccforthefuture.com/latest-news>
, which has now gathered more than 100,000 signatories. In the meantime, in the 
absence of a coherent government commitment to arts provision in schools, 
charities and individuals are having to fill the gap.

Theatre director Fiona Laird set up the National Youth Arts Trust in 2013 
<http://www.nationalyouthartstrust.org.uk/?akp> to provide bursaries for 
talented children who found themselves unable to develop their skills for want 
of the most basic provision – the cost of a musical instrument or the train 
fare to attend a drama school audition in London. It now supports more than 
1,000 young people through different projects; patrons include Ewan McGregor, 
Adrian Lester, Gary Kemp and Christopher Eccleston. “So many of my friends who 
are successful actors say they wouldn’t have been able to get started in their 
careers now,” Laird says. ‘The performing arts are becoming luxuries for rich 
kids and that’s wrong, because talent doesn’t go with money.”

Writers William Fiennes and Katie Waldegrave started the charity First Story 
<http://www.firststory.org.uk/> to allow professional novelists to tutor 
creative writing in challenging schools; comedian Josie Long foundedArts 
Emergency <http://www.arts-emergency.org/>, which provides mentors and 
encourages the study of arts subjects at college and university among young 
people who might otherwise regard them as an unaffordable luxury. Last week the 
current children’s laureate, Chris Riddell, and a group of his predecessors 
convened to discuss ways to promote creative learning in schools.’

But the obvious problem with charities is that by definition they can’t be 
everywhere and such an approach is no substitute for a nationwide educational 
commitment to the arts that reflects the value of the creative sector to the 
economy and to personal wellbeing.

A generation of young people who wanted overwhelmingly to be European citizens 
and already feel betrayed will grow up to shape the next few decades. Carving 
out a space for them to express themselves creatively at school and college, 
and not necessarily in ways that have to be assessed and tabled through exams, 
will be crucial to developing imagination, curiosity and empathy, qualities so 
painfully lacking in the recent political debate and which might do much to 
shape a more tolerant future society.

The government should consider not only the inclusion of the expressive arts 
in the EBacc curriculum, but also investment in teachers who can provide art, 
drama and music outside the timetable, for the less tangible – but no less 
valuable – purpose of expanding minds and, yes, growing souls.
 