
11.29am GMT 

And that's that. The Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> is over and we have a new 
champion, Stanislas Wawrinka taking one giant leap into immortality. Thanks for 
reading and emailing over the past two weeks. Bye!

11.27am GMT 

Stan the Man goes up to collect his trophy. Applause. Cheers. "Hello 
everybody," he says. "Rafa, I am really sorry for you. I hope your back is 
going to be fine. You are an amazing champion and a really great guy. You did a 
great job to come back last year. I still don't know if I'm dreaming or not but 
we'll see tomorrow morning."

11.24am GMT 

"I'm sorry to finish this way," Nadal says. "I tried very, very hard." Oh God. 
Here come the waterworks. 

11.22am GMT 

Nadal manages a smile. "First thing I want to say is many thanks to Stan, you 
really deserve it," he formalities. "We have a great relationship. Bad luck was 
against me today but you really deserve it, so many congratulations."

11.21am GMT 

Nadal goes up to collect his runner-up trophy. He looks like he might hit 
someone with it. If his back didn't hurt so much, that is.

11.19am GMT 

Can Wawrinka win more slams now? Yes. They'll be looking at him differently 
now. 


11.17am GMT 

Wawrinka is the first player outside the top four to win a grand slam since 
Juan Martin del Porto won the US Open in 2009.Del Potro had to beat Nadal and 
Federer; Wawrinka had to beat Djokovic and Nadal. Wawrinka is the first man to 
win a grand slam by beating the No1 and No2 seeds since 1993. Sport is hard.

Updated at 11.19am GMT

11.15am GMT 

There hasn't been any word on what Nadal actually did to his back. The fact he 
managed to play on for two and a half sets suggests it might not be too serious.

11.14am GMT 

That was the weirdest final in recent memory. But don't let Nadal's injury 
detract from Wawrinka's achievement. He still had to win that match - for a 
while, it looked like he might choke - and let's not forget that Wawrinka was 
streets ahead of Nadal before he hurt his back. He was already a set and a 
break up when it happened. 

11.12am GMT 

Another sentence I never thought I'd write: Stanislas Wawrinka is now the 
world No3.

11.11am GMT 

Wawrinka celebrates in typically understated fashion. He shares a respectful 
shake of hands withRafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>
, who must be so disappointed. He doesn't want to rub it in, even if he is on 
top of the world. There won't have been many more popular champions than 
Stanislas Wawrinka and this partly explains why.

11.10am GMT 

STANISLAS WAWRINKA WINS THE AUSTRALIAN OPEN, BEATING RAFAEL NADAL 6-3, 6-2, 
3-6, 6-3!

Stanislas Wawrinka, then, serving for his first ever grand slam. Suddenly my 
mind turns back to Andy Murray's final game against Novak Djokovic in the 
Wimbledon final last year. This could potentially be just as dramatic. But not 
initially. Nadal misses a return. 15-0. Just what Wawrinka wanted. He misses a 
second serve but then goes for broke on the second, sending it firmly down the 
middle and forcing Nadal to net a backhand. 30-0. Nadal then sends a backhand 
long and it's 40-0 - Wawrinka has three championship points! Can he do it? What 
must be going through his mind now? Something along the lines of 
"OMIGODOMIGODOMIGODOMIGODOMIGODOMIGOD!" But he stays strong. He moves forward. 
The ball sits up perfectly for him to strike. And he strikes it perfectly. 
There's no getting to that forehand for Nadal and ... Wawrinka has won! He's 
won! He's actually won! He's done it! Stanislas Wawrinka is the Australian Open 
champion!

11.06am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 3-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): What will 
losing that game do to Wawrinka's spirit? Will his shoulders slump? Perhaps 
not. At 15-all, he's hitting with freedom again and thudding groundstrokes 
force Nadal to net for 15-30. Nadal then decides to come forward but a 
Wawrinka's pass is intelligent - low enough to ensure that Nadal doesn't want 
to stoop down to reach it. Two break points! And now he's in the moment, 
sending a wonderful forehand down the line to break! He will serve for the 
championship! With new balls! "Disagree with Jon Horsley - Nadal is handing it 
to Wawrinka on a plate, he's hardly serving and not moving anything like his 
usual self," says Kathleen Fetigan. "It's Wawrinka who is losing not Nadal 
winning. If he does win (and I think even he can't) it will be a mental 
victory. It's always said Nadal's mind is his strongest weapon."

11.02am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 3-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): "Nadal will 
attack now," wrote some expert moments ago. Sure enough, he's quickly up 0-30 
and he soon has three break points as Wawrinka sends a forehand into the 
stratosphere. He escaped from a similar situation in the first set but this is 
a different match now. Wawrinka's forehand goes wide. Just when he thought he 
had Nadal. Wrong! You only have Nadal when the umpire says so.


11.00am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 2-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): That's more 
like it from Wawrinka. He defends expertly on the first point and then wins it 
with another huge forehand. 0-15. It should be 0-30 but he misses a forehand 
when Nadal was stranded. He's picking up the pace, though. Nadal can't stand 
the heat and he nets twice to give Wawrinka two break points! Can he finally 
take one? He can! Nadal has no answer to a forehand down the line and the 
finishing line is in sight again for Wawrinka! He's two games away. But Nadal 
will attack now. He's got nothing to lose. 


10.54am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 2-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A Wawrinka 
forehand clips the top of the net and Nadal skips forward to win the point with 
a gleeful forehand, but he can't do anything about the two aces that follow. 
Nadal then misses two returns to give Wawrinka a straightforward hold, though 
it looked ominous at 0-15.


10.52am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 2-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Wawrinka 
continues to make poor errors off the Nadal serve. He's not going to win if he 
can't stop doing that. He's in a bit of a rut. "If Nadal wins it won't sit well 
with me at all," says Jon Horsley. "Not really sure entirely why but it seems 
off.  He sacrificed a set and brought the match down to his level. Fair enough, 
Wawrinka should have dealt with it better but you can't mentally prepare for 
that."

10.48am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 1-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): A 
comfortable hold for Wawrinka. He still should win this match. But it's not 
just any match and it's not just any opponent, even if that opponent does have 
a knacked back. "I've always had this thought that one day, when Rafa's in a 
pinch, he'll just pause a moment, laugh and admit he's not actually left-handed 
after all and switch hands, a-la The Princess Bride," says Michael Brown. "This 
match is heading into storybook territory already, so just maybe.."

10.45am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 1-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): The other 
question is how long the painkillers and massages can sustain Nadal. At 15-all, 
a tired backhand from Nadal flies into the net. He still can't get much pace on 
his serves and Wawrinka earns two break points by spanking a forehand down the 
line. He had four in the third set but didn't take any and he can't take these 
ones either, failing to put his returns back into play. More opportunities go 
to waste. He keeps letting Nadal off the hook. Another poor return from 
Wawrinka gives Nadal the advantage and a forehand helps him hold. 


10.40am GMT 

Fourth set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 0-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): This is a 
crucial game for Wawrinka. Nadal, who looked like he was about to cry not so 
long ago, is happier now. He's got that look back in his eye and Wawrinka can't 
let him build any more momentum. To do so, he needs to rediscover his rhythm, 
so it's a good job he wins the first three points in this game. A lovely 
backhand winner seals the hold. 


10.37am GMT 

Nadal is having more treatment on his back. Wawrinka could probably do with 
some therapy at this point. Nadal won't quit. We know this much.

Updated at 10.38am GMT

10.36am GMT 

RAFAEL NADAL WINS THE THIRD SET 6-3 TO TRAIL 2-1 IN SETS

I must admit I didn't think I would be writing this sentence at the end of the 
second set but here goes: Rafael Nadal is serving for the third set. But is 
that Wawrinka starting to hit more freely? A forehand down the line makes it 
0-15, but he's still wound up, chastising himself after a missed forehand makes 
it 15-all. Nadal then badly mishits a forehand and then whistles a backhand 
wide to give Wawrinka two break points, but the Swiss can't take advantage, 
missing two forehands to bring it back to deuce. He's not happy. He's had four 
break points in this set and he hasn't taken one. A wayward backhand from 
Wawrinka gives Nadal set point but the Swiss then goes on the attack, saving it 
with a whipped forehand winner. Another poor backhand from Wawrinka gives Nadal 
a second set-point, though, and this time there's no escape: Wawrinka batters a 
forehand return into the net and the third set is Nadal's! Is the most unlikely 
comeback of all time on? It's on! Unbelievable.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> isn't just played on the court, it's 
played in the mind.


10.29am GMT 

Third set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 5-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Wawrinka holds to 
love. Nadal will serve for the third set. This will be interesting. 

10.27am GMT 

Third set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 5-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): What Wawrinka has 
to do is play Nadal as if he isn't injured. He was hitting him off the court 
until the injury and there are a few signs he's realised what's required. At 
15-all, he's forced wide by a Nadal forehand but produces a delicious 
cross-court backhand winner. And yet. Nadal won't bugger off. A booming 
forehand makes it 30-all and two errors from Wawrinka allows Nadal to hold. 
He's ... a game away from winning the third set. About 25 minutes ago, we were 
expecting him to retire.


10.24am GMT 

Third set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 4-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The pep has 
disappeared from Wawrinka's game. He's playing like he's the one who's injured. 
Instead, his legs have turned to jelly, and Nadal smells blood, tearing into a 
backhand to make it 15-30. But Wawrinka responds with three excellent winners 
to hold. It would still be astonishing if Nadal wins this match.


10.20am GMT 

Third set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 4-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): This match just 
gets more peculiar. Down 0-15, Nadal responds with two winners. He's going for 
broke more. Wawrinka wallops a forehand wide to make it 40-15; Nadal puts one 
away to hold. He's actually going to win this set. "Hmm...I've no doubt the 
Nadal was genuinely injured but he's absolutely milked the sympathy that he was 
getting for that (from the officials, crowd, etc)," says David Wall. "He's 
played it up and it's clearly got to Stan.  Of course, Nadal would say that was 
unintentional but he's clearly not that naive.  It's obvious gamesmanship and 
though he's every right to do that people should at least call him out about 
it."


10.17am GMT 

Third set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 3-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Before Nadal 
injured his back, Wawrinka was going for every shot but now he's playing safe 
and it's hurting him. He holds this game thanks to three aces though. "Nadal 
though, eh?" says Simon McMahon. "Dearie me. He couldn't, could he?"


10.15am GMT 

Third set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 3-0 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Is the tide 
turning? Suddenly Wawrinka is starting to make errors. Although he drags 
himself back to 30-all from 30-0 down, two more wayward shots help Nadal hold. 
Did Wawrinka relax? Or is he playing the occasion now? Having seemed so cool, 
now he doesn't know what to do.


10.12am GMT 

Third set: Nadal 3-6, 2-6, 2-0 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): It's hard to know 
what to say. We're not exactly watching a match at the moment but there's still 
the lingering sense that Nadal might be able to find a second wind, against an 
opponent who may be gripped by the knowledge that he is a set away from winning 
his first major. As such, Wawrinka double-faults to make it 0-15 and Nadal then 
overpowers him. An ace brings it back to 15-30, but a thunderous forehand from 
Nadal gives him two break points at 15-40. Hang on! Wasn't he supposed to be 
dead and buried? Wawrinka saves the first with an ace but then flaps a forehand 
into the net. Nadal breaks for the first time in the match. Maybe the 
painkillers are kicking in.


10.08am GMT 

Third set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-6, 1-0 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Nadal is nothing 
if not a fighter. After more treatment from the trainer, he's back on for the 
third set. You have to admire his guts and I wonder if he's carrying on out of 
respect for Wawrinka. Because no one's getting much out of this at the moment. 
More sorry errors from Nadal give Wawrinka two break points at 15-40, but he 
can't take them, sending one forehand wide and another into the net. Deuce. And 
then, out of nowhere, Nadal regains his power, a blistering forehand giving him 
the advantage. Nadal holds as Wawrinka sends one long. 

10.04am GMT 

STANISLAS WAWRINKA WINS THE SECOND SET 6-2 TO LEAD 2-0 IN SETS!

Wawrinka wasted three set points in the previous game and it's perhaps not too 
surprising to see him struggling to maintain his intensity against a stricken 
opponent. But he can't show any mercy. Not now. He recovers from 
double-faulting on the first point but it's not hard to hit winners and aces 
against someone who can't move. He soon has two set points and an ace down the 
middle is all he needs. For a moment, it seems that Nadal is going to retire 
but he's refusing to give up, simply out of pure stubbornness. 


Updated at 10.04am GMT

10.00am GMT 

Second set: Nadal* 3-6, 2-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): The crowd has fallen 
deathly quiet. No one wants to see this. Anything but this. This is pure 
torture for everyone involved. Wawrinka soon has two set points. Nadal is 
almost unable to compete, although he can't rid himself of his true nature, 
digging in to save the first with a clever volley. Wawrinka then wallops a 
forehand long to bring it to deuce. Nadal has to save a third set point and he 
somehow manages to hold. That's the first game he's won since the time-out. But 
he's got his face in his hands as he goes back to his chair. Wawrinka will 
serve for a two-set lead. "I feel sad for Wawrinka," says Saurav Samaddar. "If 
he wins this, everyone will say its because Nadal was injured, forgetting how 
Warinka was dominating him even before the back injury."


9.55am GMT 

Second set: Nadal 3-6, 1-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): It's all fallen so 
flat. Wawrinka starts with two aces. 30-0. A powderpuff backhand flops into the 
net. 40-0. But then Nadal enjoys a slice of luck as a timely net-cord makes it 
40-15 and a fine backhand return makes it 40-30, before Wawrinka slices wide to 
bring it to deuce. An ace down the middle from Wawrinka brings him the 
advantage and he sends a backhand down the line to hold. This must be surreal 
for Wawrinka.


9.52am GMT 

Nadal has the trainer on again. A quick massage, though, and he's back on 
court. He's not giving up. Yet.

9.51am GMT 

Second set: Nadal* 3-6, 1-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): This is looking bad 
for Nadal. He might as well serve under-arm at the moment. He might have to 
retire at this rate. A double-fault, delivered about as quickly as Teddy 
Sheringham runs, makes it 15-30. A backhand past the line makes it 15-40. Two 
break points. Wawrinka drops a deft backhand past Nadal to break again. Nadal 
looks like he's on the verge of tears. This is terrible. 


9.48am GMT 

Second set: Nadal 3-6, 1-3 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): There are those who 
will tell you that was just an attempt to get into Wawrinka's head by Nadal and 
that there was nothing wrong with him. Who knows? All I can say is that 
Wawrinka raced through that service game, holding to love, and that Nadal 
hardly moved for any of his serves. He doesn't look right.

9.46am GMT 

Nadal is back on court but he took longer than the time he was allowed to 
return. Why hasn't he been penalised?

Updated at 9.46am GMT

9.45am GMT 

"You have a choice," says the umpire, Carlos Ramos. "You can fight about this 
or forget about it. I think you should forget about it." Wawrinka is in a funk. 
He is fuming. He's not letting this go. He chucks a towel away and another suit 
has had to come on to try to placate him. Let's hope he doesn't let this affect 
him because this is his final to lose at the moment.

9.43am GMT 

Wawrinka wants to know why Nadal has gone off court. The umpire, who's 
apparently taken the hippocratic oath, says he can't tell him. Wawrinka, it's 
fair to say, disagrees. "You have to tell me why," he says.

9.40am GMT 

MEDICAL TIME-OUT

Rafael Nadal has left the court to receive treatment from the trainer on his 
back. Wawrinka has to stay focused.

9.40am GMT 

Second set: Nadal* 3-6, 1-2 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Nadal has won 17% of 
points on his second serve so far, which is Not Very Good. But Wawrinka is 
dictating this match. Only sheer strength of character can keep Nadal in this 
match at the moment because it's being played on Wawrinka's terms. He's also 
wincing and feeling his lower back after a wild forehand into the net makes it 
40-30. That's uncharacteristic for Nadal, who's not one to let his opponent 
know he's in pain. He loses the next point to make it deuce but manages to 
hold. Just. His final two serves were noticeably slow. The trainer is on. "What 
a start from Stan...who would have predicted this!" says Stephen McKenna. "Can 
he keep it up?"


9.34am GMT 

Second set: Nadal 3-6, 0-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The question is how 
long can Wawrinka keep this up. Diana Badder thinks not. "I doubt it but cross 
fingers, sometimes all their energy  goes into the first set and then, if it's 
not Nadal!, they fizzle out...." she forebodes. You may be right and having 
been 40-0 up in this game, Wawrinka is dragged back to 40-30. So what does he 
do? He serve-volleys. Of course he does. The punched forehand volley to win the 
last point is a thing of beauty.


9.32am GMT 

Second set: Nadal* 3-6, 0-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Wow. Wow is the word. 
Did anyone see that coming? What a marvellous set of tennis that was from 
Wawrinka and what nerves of steel to hold when it came to the crunch. How often 
do you see Nadal fail to break from 0-40? More pertinently, how often do you 
see Nadal dominated in this manner? He's being picked off at every opportunity. 
This is incredible from Wawrinka. Two forehands huger than the Empire State 
Building make it 0-30 and then he has Nadal on the run, the Spaniard slapping a 
tired forehand into the net to make it 0-40. Three break points for Wawrinka! 
Before Nadal can serve, he's given a warning over a time violation. That'll 
lift his mood, no doubt. And so will this. Nadal serves wide and Wawrinka 
reaches with all his might to crack a two-handed cross-court backhand into the 
corner! The angles he's finding are ridiculous. Nadal isn't even bothering to 
go for some of these shots. He's stunned. The world No1 is a set and a break 
down.

9.26am GMT 

STANISLAS WAWRINKA WINS THE FIRST SET 6-3!

Stanislas Wawrinka has played Rafael Nadal 12 times and he has never won a set 
before. Now he's on the verge of winning one for the first time and it's in his 
first grand slam final, so it's not entirely surprising to see him tighten up. 
He mishits a forehand to lose the first point and Nadal then rips into a second 
serve with a scorching forehand down the line to make it 0-30. Uh oh. Wawrinka 
then suffers extreme misfortune as what would have been a forehand winner clips 
the top of the net, taking the pace off the ball and allowing Nadal to take 
control of the rally, eventually landing the killer blow with a forehand winner 
to earn three break points. But then it's Nadal's turn to experience 
butterflies, allowing Wawrinka to save three break points. On the third, he 
walloped a return miles long off a second serve! Extraordinary! Wawrinka then 
wins his fourth successive point to make it set point, Nadal blocking a 
backhand return past the baseline. It's set point! And this time Wawrinka 
doesn't blink, a heatseeker of an ace sending the crowd wild! He was 0-40 down, 
for crying out loud! He won five points in a row. Amazing. No one wins 27 sets 
in a row against Stanislas Wawrinka.


9.19am GMT 

First set: Nadal* 3-5 Wawrinka (*denotes server): Nadal isn't going to make 
this easy for Wawrinka, two big serves making it 30-0. His second double-fault 
of the match follows but he makes up for that with an ace to make it 40-15. A 
Wawrinka forehand then sails long and he will now have to serve it out. The 
moment of truth approaches.


Updated at 9.19am GMT

9.15am GMT 

First set: Nadal 2-5 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): The fear was that Wawrinka 
wouldn't be able to handle the pressure of his first grand slam final but we 
can forget about that now.He means business. He's here to play. An ace makes it 
15-0. A third backhand volley makes it 30-0. An explosive forehand down the 
line makes it 40-0 and, I have to tell you this, I can't stop letting out yelps 
of astonished joy at the quality of these winners from Wawrinka. He loses his 
focus a little, giving Nadal a brief look at 40-30, but he makes sure he holds 
as Nadal knocks a backhand return long. Nadal must hold to stay in the first 
set. Isn't sport great?


9.11am GMT 

First set: Nadal* 2-4 Wawrinka (*denotes server): The crowd have liked what 
they have seen so far. No one wants this to be a straight sets humiliation. We 
want a bare-knuckle brawl and at the moment it looks like we'll get one, 
because the world No1 has been on the rack in these early exchanges. The most 
encouraging thing for Wawrinka is that he's found his range with his backhand 
and a blistering shot down the line makes it 30-all. He was 30-0 down. But this 
is just exquisite from Wawrinka. He plays a good approach shot, moves forward 
and earns a break point with a backhand volley that looked easier than it was. 
Nadal saves it with an awkward serve, though. "Come on!" he bellows. Deuce. 
Wawrinka then finally misses a backhand to give Nadal the advantage and he 
clings on as the Swiss sends a forehand long. Nadal holds but he's got some 
serious thinking to do.


9.05am GMT 

First set: Nadal 1-4 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): You would, of course, expect 
Nadal to come roaring back straight away and it's quickly 0-15 but Wawrinka 
reacts magnificently to hold. He takes no time at all to make it 15-all and 
then two booming aces down the middle make it 40-15. Then he changes it up by 
slicing a serve out wide and racing forward to put away a classy volley. 
Nadal's got no idea what's going on here. He's been totally bamboozled by Stan 
the Man.


9.03am GMT 

First set: Nadal* 1-3 Wawrinka (*denotes server): The problem for Federer 
against Nadal was a complete inability to trouble the Spaniard on serve. His 
returning was decidedly shabby and Wawrinka cannot afford to be so lax. But he 
wins the first point here as Nadal misjudges a drop-shot, allowing Wawrinka to 
romp forward and whip a backhand from left to right to make it 0-15. It's soon 
15-all but Nadal then double-faults to make it 15-30. Interesting. Very 
interesting. A chance for Wawrinka. Nadal tries to surprise him by coming to 
the net but a poor volley allows Wawrinka to take control and when he strikes a 
backhand down the line, Nadal can only block his volley wide to make it 15-40! 
Two break points, the first of the match, and Wawrinka only needs one, a series 
of powerful forehands too much for Nadal to handle. Well. I say! Nerves? What 
nerves?


8.58am GMT 

First set: Nadal 1-2 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): Nadal sends a looping return 
to Wawrinka, who swats a forehand away contemptuously to make it 15-0. Away 
with you! Another huge forehand then forces Nadal to slice past the baseline. 
This is promising. Two more excellent winners help Wawrinka hold comfortably 
again. Then it's time for the BBC commentators to try to decipher the meaning 
of Wawrinka's tattoo; it sure is a tricky conundrum! Thankfully they've got 
their crack team on the case. "It's a weird one," muses one of them. Yes, very 
weird. What could it possibly mean?


8.53am GMT 

First set: Nadal* 1-1 Wawrinka (*denotes server): I wonder if Nadal is feeling 
nervous. Actually, no I don't. He's not feeling nervous. Why would he? He's 
used to the big stage. Just another day at the office for him and he holds with 
consummate ease, wayward returns from Wawrinka making it 40-0, before Nadal 
slashes a forehand winner away. "Though he doesn't have the experience etc," 
says Jon Horsley. "He is a man who is happy with what he's achieved already 
which I would say makes him a much more dangerous opponent in a final."


8.51am GMT 

First set: Nadal 0-1 Wawrinka* (*denotes server): And so it begins. It's the 
Australian Open final - hee! - and it's Stanislas Wawrinka to open the serving. 
How must he be feeling right now? Nervous, I'll bet. But he's not willing to 
show it. You can't against Nadal and he starts well, coming out on top in a 
fearsome baseline rally, before Nadal then hits long on the next point. 30-0. A 
stray backhand from Wawrinka makes it 30-15 but Nadal then clunks a forehand 
wide to make it 40-15, Wawrinka's one-handed backhand dealing well with the 
Spaniard's top-spin. Wawrinka holds as Nadal nets a return. He couldn't have 
asked for a better start than that.

8.40am GMT 

Tok! Tok! Tokity tok! They're knocking up. Wawrinka is in a white t-shirt and 
red shorts; Nadal is in a red t-shirt and grey shorts. Thought you'd like to 
know.

8.39am GMT 

Time for the coin toss. But first a photo with a beaming child, who clearly 
prefers Nadal. "Hello Rafa!" he yelps. The umpire then asks him who's going to 
call the toss. "Rafa!" says the boy. "I don't want to," says Rafa. Oh Rafa! How 
could you! Wawrinka it is then. He calls heads. It's tails. Nadal chooses to 
receive. Wawrinka will serve first. What a kerfuffle. 

8.35am GMT 

Here come the players. Stanislas Wawrinka walks out first, warm cheers 
greeting him. Then Rafael Nadal. He gets a louder reception. Poor Stan. 

8.24am GMT 

"Do you think it looks like Stan may/will be needing to make another trip to 
the tattoo parlour, leaving with Hedda Gabbler's "Ah well, that's life..." up 
the other arm," says Jeremy Boyce. "I'll eat my tennis racket if he doesn't." 
You can't back out now.


8.13am GMT 

The last time the world No8 reached the Australian Open final, Brian Teacher 
won it. BUT WILL WAWRINKA BE GIVEN A LESSON TODAY?



Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zXDo4dL7SU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zXDo4dL7SU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zXDo4dL7SU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zXDo4dL7SU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zXDo4dL7SU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zXDo4dL7SU&media=>
close  STAY TUNED FOR HOURS AND HOURS OF GUARDIAN-APPROVED HUMOUR 
7.53am GMT 

Wawrinka seems to be in a relaxed mood. At least he'll have support in the 
crowd.
Stanislas Wawrinka (@stanwawrinka) 
Allez ... @AustralianOpen <https://twitter.com/AustralianOpen> 
pic.twitter.com/xlJLiHq0Pp <http://t.co/xlJLiHq0Pp>
 <https://twitter.com/stanwawrinka/statuses/427334848802332672> January 26, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/stanwawrinka/statuses/427334848802332672> 
6.04pm GMT 

Preamble

Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail better.

The words, you won’t need telling by now, of Samuel Beckett. Another noted 
scholar, Homer Simpson, once said that trying is the first step towards failure 
but Stanislas Wawrinka found more in common with Beckett’s message and that is 
why he has the Irish poet's/playwright’s/author's words tattooed on his left 
arm. For Wawrinka, the quote has never been more relevant. Wawrinka is 28. He 
has taken a while to arrive at the very highest level of the game and this is 
his first grand slam final. Yet while he’s removed that monkey from his back, a 
hulking gorilla has jumped straight back on. Wawrinka has done brilliantly to 
get this far. But this is nosebleed territory for the likable Swiss and second 
nature for his opponent today, Rafael Nadal, who has won 13 grand slams. These 
two have played each other 12 times and Wawrinka has never won. He's never even 
taken a set off the Spaniard. That Beckett bloke never said anything about 
having to find a way to beat Rafael Nadal.

You will not find too many people willing to bet on Wawrinka making it 
13th time lucky. But let’s not forget that Wawrinka beat Novak Djokovic – at 
last – in a magnificent five sets in the quarter-final and then held his nerve 
in an intolerably tense semi-final against Tomas Berdych. Stan has been one 
helluva man over the past year. His backhand is one of the greatest shots in 
the game, his forehand’s not too shabby either and he is serving exceptionally 
but even more importantly, the man they now call Stanima has improved his 
fitness beyond recognition.

In the past, this was a player who would never be spoken about as a potential 
champion, never tipped for anything more than a quarter-final if he was lucky, 
but now he is capable of mixing it with the best. It’s just a shame it’s taken 
Wawrinka this long, because what an entertainer he is. He would be a very 
popular Australian Open champion. Unfortunately his task today is to make the 
impossible possible: he has to beat the winning machine. While Wawrink has 
never won a grand slam, Nadal has won 13 and only needs one more title to draw 
level with Pete Sampras. Rarely flustered in his semi-final against Roger 
Federer, apart from when he needed treatment for that pesky blister, it is hard 
to see anything other than Nadal in straight sets. But you know what they say – 
tennis is a funny old game. Keep looking at that tattoo, Stan.

They’ll be playing tennis: imminently. 

Updated at 7.59am GMT
 