
Stanislas Wawrinka is one of the most popular players in tennis but the world 
No8 cannot buy a friend in Melbourne on the eve of his first grand slam final 
at 28. There are several good reasons for that, the most obvious being the man 
in his way,Rafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>, who is 
appearing in his 19th slam final and is one win away from equalling Pete 
Sampras's total of 14 majors.

In a sport built on numbers, all of them look bad for Wawrinka, the man with 
the baggy shorts, shy smile and red nose, but one statistic stands out: Nadal 
has yet to lose even a set to the Swiss in 12 matches.

That is history almost as mountainous as the 16 straight losses that hung over 
Vitas Gerulaitis when he faced Jimmy Connors at Madison Square Garden in 1980 – 
and beat him. "Nobody," the winner remarked later, "beats Vitas Gerulaitis 17 
times in a row."

Wawrinka, meanwhile, does not seem bothered by the odds or the predictions. As 
he has done most of his career, and with rising success the past couple of 
years, he brings the same grit and will to every match. If it is good enough, 
he wins; if not, he doesn't. He takes the view that he will have to be at his 
best to beat Nadal but that the world No1 will not necessarily have to be at 
his best to beat him.

"The record is not what I am looking at," Wawrinka said on Saturday. "What I 
am looking at is Rafa. He's the best player in the world, and his game is quite 
tough for me, with my one-handed backhand. But I played a good match against 
him last year, a close one [when Nadal won 7-6, 7-6 in the round-robin stage of 
the ATP World Tour Finals in London].

"I'm playing my best tennis here. Physically I'm ready. I had two days off 
[afterbeating Tomas Berdych in the semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/23/stanislas-wawrinka-tomas-berdych-australian-open-final>
], so that's perfect for me."

What would have been even more perfect for him would have been an all‑Swiss 
final against Roger Federer,whom Nadal beat fairly handily in the second 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/24/rafael-nadal-beats-roger-federer-australian-open>
 on Friday. "For sure it would have been amazing to play Roger in the final," 
the new Swiss No1 said. (Federer drops to No8 in the world in the new rankings 
on Monday, and Wawrinka will climb to No5 – or No3, if he wins.) "But let's 
watch this match. I'm happy to play Rafa. He's a really good friend. We 
practise a lot together. He's an amazing champion."

Someone who shares that view – along with the rest of tennis – is Sampras, who 
is in Melbourne for the first time in many years. "Rafa is so good, such a 
great athlete," the American said. "He's going to do it all in the game. He 
could very well win 16, 17 majors. He is the strong favourite for the final. If 
I was betting, I would take Rafa.

"He's going to equal me – and pass me at some stage. I've accepted that. I 
didn't know when I retired that two guys would win 14 majors but it looks like 
it's going to happen this year. It's a credit to the sport. These guys are good 
for the game.

"Stan has always hit the ball well. He's improved his game over the last 
couple of years. Mentally he's a little stronger. He believes in himself a lot 
more. In his first grand slam final he'll be a little bit nervous. It's a 
different feeling. He needs to settle down, relax, find his feet, and he'll be 
fine. But he's up against a really tough opponent and ultimately that's what 
might hurt him.

"Rafa is playing well, he's confident, he's moving well. He really is peaking 
at the right time. I see Rafa winning but hopefully Stan can get into the 
match, settle down and play."

If the Nadal prediction needed any more substantiation, there are more 
statistics for fans of Wawrinka to consider – not all of them gloomy. For 
instance, the last time a world No8 reached theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final was 34 years ago, 
when Brian Teacher won it. But that's about it on the upside.

When Nadal beat Federer, it was his 200th match in a slam event, and his 177th 
win; Wawrinka has played in just 109 matches, winning 74 of them – and two of 
those at this tournament were gifted to him: a retirement in the second set 
against Andrey Golubev and a walkover against Vasek Pospisil. That said, he has 
played near his peak the rest of the fortnight, never more pleasingly than in 
his2-6, 6-4, 6-2, 3-6, 9-7 win over Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/21/stanislas-wawrinka-knocks-out-novak-djokovic-australian-open>
, the world No2.

"Before I beat Djokovic," he reminded the doubters who were throwing bombs of 
negativity at him, "it was the same. I had lost 14 times in a row to him."

Maybe he's right. Maybe history is bunkum. Maybe he will go out on Sunday 
night and prove everyone wrong – and if he does, he will be even more cherished 
than he already is, this nice guy of tennis.

Preparing for the biggest match of his life, Wawrinka took a stroll around 
Melbourne on his day off, and found a James Bond exhibition. Later he confided 
that his favourite actor in the role was Pierce Brosnan – whose last appearance 
as the man who got out of more tight corners than Houdini wasDie Another Day.
 