
A report into surgical standards at Alder Hey children's hospital that was 
prompted by the concerns of two whistleblowers has found it no longer provides 
'world class' care.

The review by The Royal College of Surgeons was carried out after concerns 
emerged about clinical care in 20 cases between 2004 and 2010. The report, 
released on Wednesday, found there was a discrepancy between the hospital's 
aspirations and current standards.

It found that some relationships within the surgical unit are beyond repair 
and there is conflict within the department. In the small number of children's 
surgery that were reviewed, five were found to have 'sub-optimal' flaws and in 
two of those, there were clinical issues. Despite the problems, however, the 
overall surgical performance was classified as safe.

Families involved in the report have been informed of the findings, as have 
staff. The health trust pointed out that the report found the surgery at the 
hospital to be safe.

The hospital carried out 27,000 operations during the time of the assessment 
and only a tiny number attracting concern. The RCS investigation began in May 
2011, after two separate whistleblowers raised concerns in June 2010 and in 
January this year.

Some problems identified within the report include failure to act when 
concerns about a trainee doctor were raised – the report concluded trainee 
assessment at times "lacked reasonable objectivity".

Problems with keeping staff skills up to date in "new surgical techniques", 
with processes described as "weak or unclear".

"Considerable stress" had been felt within the department – with counselling 
recommended for some individuals.

It concludes that the overall the surgical care of patients did not fall below 
the general standard of acceptable practice prevalent within the UK.

"However, in five of the 20 cases/case series that the witnesses 
identifieeither the care given was sub-optimal, or clinical governance appears 
to have been weak."

It concluded that the clinical director was also currently providing 
"effective clinical leadership," and the report also acknowledged the trust is 
already taking steps to improve.

Louise Shepherd, chief executive at Alder Hey Children's NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Foundation Trust, said: "The safety 
of the children in our care is our highest priority.

"We are pleased that the review concluded that clinical standards of surgical 
practice were within UK acceptable standards and that we provide a safe 
surgical service at Alder Hey."

She said the report's recommendations were "helpful" and the trust had started 
"putting actions in place to ensure Alder Hey continues to be a leading 
children's trust".

She added: "We will continue to subject ourselves to rigorous scrutiny to 
continue to provide the best care for children and young people at Alder Hey."

More than a decade ago, the hospital was at the centre of a scandal after it 
emerged that a rogue pathologist, Professor Dick van Velzen, systematically and 
unethically removed organs from dead children without their parents' consent. 
But the hospital has worked hard to maintain its reputation as a centre for 
excellence in Merseyside since then.

The children's hospital - one of the largest of its kind in Europe - receives 
referrals from hospitals across the country.

The paediatric surgery department, which incorporates neonatal surgery, 
general surgery and urology, treats about 4,500 children each year.

RCS reviewers recommended the trust and university leaders "review the 
strategic aims of their partnerships, their joint strategic plan and the 
resources they have in place for meeting them".

They made 22 other recommendations including providing more individual support 
to consultants, reviewing its consent practices and improving written records.
 