
Stanislas Wawrinka has reached his first grand slam final with a four-set 
victory over Tomas Berdych at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. The 28-year-old knocked 
out the three-times defending champion Novak Djokovic in the quarter-finals and 
was roared on by the majority of the Melbourne crowd to a 6-3, 6-7, 7-6, 7-6 
semi-final win against Berdych.

Wawrinka, from Switzerland, has blossomed into a major threat late in his 
career under the guidance of coach Magnus Norman. He could yet meet another 
Swiss-Swedish combination in the final on Sunday, with Roger Federer – under 
the guidance of Norman's compatriot Stefan Edberg for the first time – to play 
Rafael Nadal in the second semi-final on Friday.

Wawrinka said: "It's amazing. I'm so happy to be here right now, to win that 
match, to make that first grand slam final. I didn't expect to make a grand 
slam final and tonight it's happening.

"Roger is the best player ever. He texted me last night saying how happy he 
was that two Swiss guys were in the semis. I told him: 'For you it's normal. 
For me, it's not normal.' I'm going to watch the match tomorrow on my TV maybe 
with some popcorn."

Wawrinka picked up where he had left off in his stunning upset of Djokovic, 
taking the opening set after Berdych missed a smash on the only break point.

With both men strong on serve, it was always likely to be a contest of small 
margins, and so it proved.

Wawrinka was the more aggressive off the ground to start with but in the 
second-set tie-break Berdych came alive, winning six points in a row with 
hitting of power and precision. The momentum had shifted and the Czech 
threatened a break at 4-4 in the third set.

But Wawrinka, who had won six of his previous seven matches against Berdych, 
recovered from 0-30 and then saved a break point, letting out a huge yell of 
"come on".

It was the first real show of positive emotion on Rod Laver Arena, and 
although Berdych appeared calm, he betrayed the tension in his arm with two 
costly double faults in the tie-break.

That left Wawrinka one set away from his maiden final, and he pushed for the 
advantage at the start of the fourth set. Berdych stood firm to save two break 
points, though, and thereafter the set adopted a pattern much like the previous 
two, again ending in a tie-break.

Wawrinka made the perfect start, moving into a 3-0 lead, and when Berdych 
double-faulted again to go 4-1 behind, the writing was on the wall.

At 6-3, Wawrinka had two match points on his own serve. He double-faulted on 
the first but on the second Berdych's return flew long and the No8 seed was 
able to celebrate the greatest night of his career so far.
 