
There was so much that was uplifting about Stanislas Wawrinka's four-sets win 
overRafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> to take his 
first major – even though the Swiss might have finished the job in three sets 
had he not temporarily lost focus when a rare back injury threatened to force 
the world No1 to quit.

Yet he was not handed the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title. He still had to 
wrench the match away from the most obdurate fighter in the game. Wawrinka 
played his best tennis in the hour before Nadal's back went on him, his worst 
when the Spaniard was a walking target and found enough resolve at the end to 
finish the job properly, after his opponent had returned to nearly full working 
order.

Victory by 6-3, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 in two hours and 21 minutes earned Wawrinka 
$2,300,000 (£1.4m) and a jump from No8 to No3 in the world, leapfrogging the 
man in whose shadow he has played all of his tennis, Roger Federer, and who he 
is happy to call "the greatest player ever".

But it is Wawrinka who is the Swiss No1 now (Federer, who lost to Nadal in the 
semi-finals, slips to No8 in the world when the latest rankings are released on 
Monday), and expectations will be higher than ever before because of his 
achievement.

He will lead Switzerland's team in the Davis Cup against Serbia in Novi Sad on 
31 January in the absence of Federer, who last week declined to make himself 
available for the tie. That has been a bone of contention between the two of 
them in the past, but this was not the time to intrude on Wawrinka's party by 
reminding him of it.

Two of his 19 aces helped him lead 4-1 within 17 minutes, and his notorious 
nerves settled. Nadal showed no sign of discomfort and could do little to stop 
Wawrinka taking the first set in 37 minutes of high-quality hitting. When 
Wawrinka broke him to love at the start of the second, the Spaniard looked 
unsettled and started feeling the base of his back.

After butchering a forehand at 30-15 in the third game, he bent double, his 
face a landscape of pain. He held, but then retreated to the physio's room for 
treatment. Wawrinka questioned the chair umpire, who declined to tell him what 
Nadal's injury was, as he is obliged to do. This created the false impression 
that Wawrinka was complaining about him leaving the court. When Nadal returned, 
the confusion deepened and the crowd booed him.

Wawrinka took the set easily enough – then froze. Nadal found something in his 
deep reserves of grit and, as his opponent struggled, he blitzed his way back 
to near parity by taking the third set in just over half an hour. It looked at 
this point as if Nadal would be strong enough to pull off one of the great 
comebacks.

The deciding set was an even fight until the sixth game when Wawrinka clipped 
a delightful forehand down the line to break. When Wawrinka surrendered the 
advantage immediately with a woeful slap down the tramlines, it did not look 
good for him. However, one final twist of fate, and he was serving for the 
match at 5-3. He found three big serves and, sweating like a schoolboy with his 
hand on the exam results, he cracked a simple and concluding forehand wide of 
Nadal to complete the kill.

"I did not want to retire," Nadal said later. "It was not an easy situation 
for me. I tried hard. I tried to finish the match as good as I can, for the 
crowd, for the opponent, for me. But it was impossible to win this way. I have 
talked enough about the back. That's life. I've had a lot of great moments in 
my career, and that was a tough one. That is part of life, part of sport. It is 
not the end of the world."

Nor is it. Nadal has not previously complained about back trouble, and his 
knee seems to be restored to rude health. He played near to his best during the 
past fortnight, hitting a peak against Federer. And he reserved his final 
thoughts for the man who beat him.

"A lot of people in this world have lots of very tough days. I'm not that kind 
of person. I feel very lucky to be able to work at something I love to do. It 
is tough tonight, and in a few weeks that's going to pass. I'm going to keep 
working, training hard. I'm going to keep enjoying this world of tennis.

"But this is Stan's day, not my day. It is very tough to stop him when he's 
playing that way. He's playing better and better, with amazing confidence, 
hitting every ball very, very hard, moving great."
 