
If every champion were as humble as Stanislas Wawrinka, sport would be a very 
fine place indeed to celebrate all that is admirable about human endeavour. If 
every loser took defeat the way Rafael Nadal accepted his opponent's bursts of 
excellence and his own physical breakdown during the final of theAustralian Open
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, that environment would be 
as close to perfect as we have any right to demand.

This was one of those sporting occasions – a good way short of greatness but 
utterly memorable, with a sliver of controversy – to encourage applause and set 
aside cynicism.

As journalists and television commentators jostled to garland the winner with 
accolades and pepper him for insights, Wawrinka remained as blushingly unmoved 
as he normally does on court. Except that earlier in the evening the old 
misgivings that have checked his development flooded back at the most 
inconvenient moment to send shivers of doubt through his racket when he was in 
sight of victory.

The Swiss found enough resolve to ignore Nadal's back problems and finished 
strongly, but there were plenty of people in the Rod Laver Arena who wondered 
if this most diffident of athletes had the steel to cut down his stricken 
opponent. Was he too nice to win?

Among them was his coach since April, Magnus Norman, who observed: "I thought 
he was a little bit soft in the third set, I was not really happy with the way 
he took the situation. Obviously it's really difficult when you play someone 
and you feel that he is suffering. You get tentative.

"He was pushing his shots a little bit, but then in the fourth he came back 
again and started to play his game. That was good that he came back."

Norman added: "I took the job because Stan for me is a really humble guy, a 
nice guy. I didn't take the job because I thought he was going to be top five 
or something like that but I knew he had great results in him."

Wawrinka did it, though. He proved nearly every expert wrong. And he did it 
his way, a little awkwardly. When they embraced at the finish, Wawrinka 
smothered Nadal with sympathy, as if he had stolen his pet dog. He did not feel 
guilty beating a wounded foe, but he did feel concern for an opponent he is 
happy to call "a great friend".

For years, Wawrinka has climbed tantalisingly within reach of the summit of 
his sport. On Sunday night, he put his hands on top of the mountain and dragged 
himself to the top, his red-tipped, turned-up nose lighting up a face that 
shouted bliss.

He is the first No8 in the world to win a slam since Brian Teacher won this 
event 33 years ago. He is the first player to beat Novak Djokovic and Nadal in 
a slam tournament. He is the first man to defeat the top two seeds at a slam 
since Sergi Bruguera in 1993 at Roland Garros. He did not know any of these 
things, but he was happy to accept them.

Did he, then, wonder if he could ever be No1 in the world? "No, not at all," 
the 28-year-old said. "I'm trying to improve my game, step after step. And 
we'll see.

"I never dreamed about winning a grand slam because, for me, I was not good 
enough to beat those guys. I still think I'm dreaming. It's a strange feeling. 
But I did it."

Many years ago, Wawrinka read a Samuel Beckett quote: "Fail better." He has it 
tattooed on his left arm to remind him of his struggle. "I had that quote in my 
head for a long time. It was part of my life, how I see life, especially how I 
see my tennis life. Before today, I always was saying that against Roger, Rafa, 
Novak, you always lose, every week. So, it's not easy, my tennis life. When you 
lose, it's tough to get through, to take a positive from a loss, failing again 
at a tournament.

"That's how I see my career. I always go back to the practice court, to try to 
improve myself, to give me a chance to beat the best players in the world. But 
to win a slam, to be No3 in the world, is a big surprise for me."

Then he allowed himself one pat on the back. "At the end, even if Rafa was 
injured, I think I deserved that grand slam, because I won against Djokovic, 
the No2, and I won against Rafa. I had an amazing two weeks. I was playing my 
best tennis ever.

"Now I am going to Novi Sad [for Switzerland's Davis Cup tie against Serbia at 
the end of the week]. It's really important for me. I'm really proud. It's a 
big honour to play for my country. I don't know how I'm going to get there 
exactly – if I'm still going to be alive after tonight – but I'm going."

It is his ability to exude ordinariness that makes Wawrinka so likeable, a 
well-known athlete about to get a lot better known, and richer. But his 
instincts are to stay grounded, to drink in an experience he suspects might 
never pass his way again. If it doesn't, he has done himself and his sport 
proud.

There would, then, be time for celebration, just as there was the night he 
collided with a few of us in a New York bar a couple of days after he beat Andy 
Murray in the US Open. He probably did not imagine that night he would one day 
be a grand slam champion. It was not in his sights. Now his horizons have 
widened, and he will take more easily what comes his way. And opponents will 
look at him a little differently.

"I will celebrate with my team and my family," he said. "Depends what time we 
finish here. For sure, I'm going to enjoy it well. I don't know where. Maybe 
just at the hotel. But there's a big chance I will get drunk tonight."
 