
Victims of the collapse of Sir Allen Stanford's business empire have expressed 
horror at prosecutors' contention that their savings bankrolled a billionaire's 
"personal playground" stretching from international cricket tournaments to 
Caribbean villas and even a ritzy restaurant, theSticky Wicket 
<http://http://www.thestickywicket.com/>.

As many as 28,000 people are thought to have lost a total of $7bn (£4.2bn) 
through the collapse of Stanford International Bank. About 4,500 are from the 
US, where the bank had 29 offices. Many others are from the Caribbean and Latin 
America – Stanford had operations as far afield as Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela, 
Panama and Peru.

"When we see him jetting around, it's tough for us," said Troy Lillie, a 
retired ExxonMobil oil refinery worker from ­Louisiana who lost his $700,000 
nest egg at Stanford's hands. "It's beyond me how he could do this with 
people's ­savings that they had worked all their lives for."

Lillie, 59, faces the prospect of returning to work on an offshore oil rig 
four years after leaving the industry in the belief that his savings would 
support him and his wife, Melanie, into old age. He had put his money into 
three of Stanford's ­certificates of deposit (CDs), which offered guaranteed 
interest rates in excess of 7% – a promise "too good to be true", according to 
the department for justice. He regrets ­trusting sweet-talking financial 
salesmen.

"If you get sick, you go to a doctor. If you need legal services, you go to an 
attorney. I worked in a refinery all my life and I'm not what you'd call a 
sophisticated investor," said Lillie. "We went to a US company, regulated by 
the securities and exchange commission, and that's where I bought these CDs."

With a large local operation in Louisiana, SIB was a well known name that 
supported local university sports teams and advertised on the television news.

"These folks were part of the community," said Lillie, whose small remnants of 
savings are rapidly depleting. "Once they're gone, it's basically sell the 
house and move to an apartment or some kind of trailer and try to use the money 
from the house to live off."

Stanford was remanded to prison on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/19/allen-stanford-arrested> facing 
21 criminal charges. The 59-year-old financier surrendered to the FBI at his 
girlfriend's home in Virginia after a six-month investigation. Stanford is 
personally accused of looting $1.6bn in undisclosed loans from the bank.

In a newly amended complaint against Stanford, the securities and exchange 
commission has alleged for the first time that the Stanford 20/20 cricket 
tournament was funded through proceeds of theft.

Stanford ran a turbo-charged sales operation in which successful agents were 
rewarded by membership of a "top producers club" convening in elegant resorts 
around the world. Prosecutors say they wooed customers with phoney figures, 
false assurances of a low-risk strategy and deeply misleading advertising.

Angela Shaw, a Dallas public relations executive whose family lost $4.5m, says 
the past six months have been like "living inside a crime movie". She is the 
founder of a Stanford victims' coalition.

"It's kind of surreal to watch him go through this process," she said. "He's 
almost like a fictional character. He's larger than life – this guy from a 
small town in Texas who ended up getting knighted."

The sale of a business manufacturing leather goods in 2007 prompted Shaw's 
family to deposit money with SIB.

"It took two generations of our family 40 years to build up this money," she 
said, expressing deep frustration that Stanford's alleged fraud eluded 
financial regulators for so long. "There were a lot of people along the way who 
should have been watching."

Nothing seemed amiss until federal marshals suddenly raided Stanford's US base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/17/allen-stanford-fraud-sec-federal-agents-houston>
 in Houston four months ago. On ­seeing the news reports, Shaw reacted quickly 
in the hope of salvaging funds from SIB's head office in Antigua. "Within a few 
hours, I had my husband, my brother and my 85-year-old father-in-law on a plane 
to Antigua. My husband was standing therewhen Vantis [the liquidators] arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/feb/20/allen-stanford-banking-operations-seized>
."

For many of those who lost money, the priority is to salvage whatever assets 
remain in the ruins of Stanford's organisation. A Florida auction house is in 
the process of selling off 24 truckloads of antique furnishings, oriental rugs 
and oil paintings that once adorned the bank's Miami office, worth an estimated 
$2m. A tug-of-war is developing between victims' lawyers and liquidators in 
Antigua over the use of remaining funds.

Alex Fundora, a Florida entrepreneur who deposited $2.7m with SIB after the 
sale of his home healthcare company in 2006, said he had believed he was 
financially secure. "I was going to make a few investments and I thought I was 
pretty secure for the rest of my life, although it was never going to be too 
fancy.‚"

Fundora, 42, says that although the interest rates offered by SIB were a 
little above those of competitors, they were not sufficiently stratospheric to 
seem impossible.

"I did some background work on it," he said. "I thought it was pretty safe 
given that this bank had been around for quite some time. It wasn't a fly by 
night."
 