
Forty of the best-known artists working today will test the value of their 
work against each other in the open market at midday on Tuesday, when an unruly 
collection of donated works will go under the hammer in London. Bidding for 
another 80 works is already open online.

At the top of the price list is art by the German painter and sculptor Anselm 
Kiefer <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer>, an honorary 
academician, which will go on sale at a guide price of between £160,000 and 
£200,000, alongside work from leading British artists and architects such as 
Gillian Wearing, David Hockney, Richard Wilson, Norman Foster, Zaha Hadid, 
Tracey Emin, Cornelia Parker and Michael Landy – all on offer with a reserve 
price of a few thousand pounds.

The participating artists, who are either members or foreign honorary members 
of theRoyal Academy of Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/royal-academy-of-arts> in Piccadilly, 
have each donated a work for the exhibition RA Now, and for the ensuing public 
sale, to raise money needed to build a £2.5m extension to the academy's 
Burlington House base. It is the first time the current membership has shown 
their work together exclusively.

The institution, which is a school as well as an exhibition venue and 
membership society, moved into its imposing home in 1868. This month it also 
moved into new premises at 6 Burlington Gardens, immediately behind the grand 
house. Part of a high-profile and ambitious architectural project, the brave 
venture has now been matched by the risk its members are taking. The auction 
exposes the artists to the perils of being ranked according to their market 
appeal.

Among the most costly art involved is work by honorary members Jeff Koons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/koons>, whose Monkey Train has a 
reserve price of £15,000, and the American pop artist Ed Ruscha, with a work 
valued at between £60,000 and £70,000. Anish Kapoor, who built the Orbit tower 
in the Olympic Park, will offer an untitled work worth up to an estimated 
£55,000, and veteran sculptor Sir Anthony Caro'sFold Centre will be on offer 
for at least £40,000.

Grayson Perry <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry>, a 
Turner prizewinner, has donated a characteristically playful pot, titledBad 
Portraits of Establishment Figures. It has a reserve value of £50,000. Perry 
has not revealed who the "badly" depicted figures represent, but fellow 
academicians Emin and Sir Peter Blake are thought to be among them.

The online auction includes works from artists such as sculptor Antony 
Gormley, painter Jenny Saville and the architect and designer Sir David 
Chipperfield, who has designed the master plan for the development of the Royal 
Academy. His project will be launched next year, with construction due to start 
in 2015. Once completed it will house a display of contemporary art and 
architecture and new facilities, including a large auditorium and a learning 
centre.
 