
It was an ordinary weekday morning on the M6 motorway when an accident caused 
a terrible traffic jam, and thousands of people resigned themselves to being 
very late to the office that day. However, one couple made their presence known 
to the police, and as soon as the officers realised the vital nature of their 
work, they were given a high-speed police escort down the hard shoulder, 
complete with radio assistance and flashing blue lights. What sort of job could 
possibly be so vital? A surgeon in accident and emergency perhaps? A government 
minister on the way to urgent peace talks? No, it was more important than that; 
the couple concerned were Richard Madeley and Judy Finnigan. Imagine if the 
police had not stepped in; someone else might have had to present daytime 
television that morning! Or worse, the programme itself might have been 
delayed. Such a scenario does not bear thinking about; no one to talk to the 
celebrity chef about his new Christmas cookbook. No one to introduce Breakfast 
Business Update. The police were later thanked on air as if they had undertaken 
some major project for charity, but sadly this happy tribute was missed by all 
the teachers, nurses and other non-essential workers who were still stuck in 
traffic on the M6.

People on television are simply far more important than the rest of us. This 
isn't necessarily what the celebrities themselves believe, it's just what the 
rest of us think. Last Wednesday the Daily Mirror devoted its first five pages 
to the sacking ofAngus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>. Of course there's 
been plenty of other news recently, there's the John Leslie story too. The 
people we are most fascinated by are the faces beamed into our living rooms 
every night. Having worked for over a decade in TV, I wasn't surprised when I 
read about Richard and Judy's police escort; only slightly taken aback that the 
police didn't scramble a helicopter to get them there even earlier. The 
officers concerned would have been excited to have a little bit of showbiz 
stardust rub off on them, and it would never have occurred to them that they 
themselves do a far more important job protecting the British public. (Although 
by helping Richard and Judy get to a TV studio, you might argue they were doing 
the opposite.)

Generally speaking, it is not the celebrities who insist that they are treated 
differently wherever they go - it is the public which feels the need to go out 
of its way to make a fuss. On the rare occassions that I have found myself 
walking down the street beside a big TV star I have always been amazed at the 
regularity with which passing lorry drivers or builders shout out or whistle. 
"Well either they are excited to see my companion's face off the telly... " I 
thought to myself, "or we are being harassed by a bunch of gay scaffolders." 
Obviously, when I was working on programmes fronted by TV stars, I never used 
my association with these famous people to my own advantage. It just so 
happened that I let the celeb walk into the packed restaurant ahead of me; I'm 
sure the waiter would have made the same effort if I had asked if he could 
possibly squeeze us in. (I prefer not to list all these celebrities - I'm not 
one of those sad hangers-on who are constantly dropping names; Madonna told me 
as much herself.)

Rubbing shoulders with the new aristocracy can benefit you in all sorts of 
ways. I used to play in a regular football game in Battersea Park with a crowd 
of TV comics, and one week a group of local lads invaded our pitch and were 
squaring up to fight anyone who dared ask them to leave. They were disarmed in 
the most unconventional fashion.

"Hang on a minute... " said the first one to our goalie, "You're off the 
telly! And that's Nick Hancock, and those two are off the Mary Whitehouse 
Experience, and he's in that lager advert... "

They were so amazed to be surrounded by famous faces that any thoughts of 
trying to start a fight disappeared in an instant. Maybe police officers could 
use this technique during armed sieges. "This is the police! Do not shoot," 
they could say through the megaphone. "We have Ant and Dec here."

The gunman would be unable to resist sticking his head out of the window to 
have a look, before finally dropping his weapon and coming out to say, "So do 
you spend a lot of time together off-screen as well?"

Somewhere in the clamour for fame that has become the gold rush of the 21st 
century, we have ceased to value people for what they actually do and now the 
overriding measure of success is the level of a person's celebrity. Who should 
I share my problems with? The daytime television host. Who is the best person 
to improve NHS menus? Call in the TV gourmet. No wonder so many people no 
longer aspire to being someone worthwhile in their local communities - the 
global village is where they want to be acknowledged. Maybe someone should 
pitch an idea to the BBC - "Useful Job Academy". Davina McCall could talk to 
camera as she dashes along the endless queue of teenage wannabes waiting 
outside BBCTelevision <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Centre; 
"Thousands of young hopefuls have turned up tonight but only one lucky winner 
will get the chance to fulfil their lifelong ambition of becoming a special 
needs teacher at a Hackney Comprehensive." We see the rejection of poor young 
Katie as she's told she hasn't made the grade. "I'm never gonna give up my 
dream... " weeps Katie. "One day I'll make it as a teacher in the inner cities, 
I'm not going to settle for second best and just become a boring old celebrity 
like everyone else... "

When I sat down to try and write a novel about all of this I found myself 
becoming increasingly anxious about where the empty religion of fame worship 
would take us. In his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Gibbon asserted 
that the development of an over-obsessive interest in sport and celebrity was 
one of the factors in the collapse of the greatest civilisation ever known to 
man. And now when I flick through a 10-page Hello! photo special about Posh and 
Becks' new baby, I can't help wondering if this is really a price worth paying 
all over again.

"Help, help, we're losing our democracy, destroying the planet and careering 
towards world war three and nobody cares!!!"

"Aaah, but look, doesn't Romeo Beckham look like his dad?' 

And so I tried to write a book that, as well as hopefully satirising our 
shallow celebrity-obsessed culture, suggests that there are more important 
things than showbiz notoriety; that maybe the way we affect the people around 
us is more important than impressing people we'll never meet; that success, 
real meaningful and personally fulfilling success, is the result of a life well 
lived. "And fingers crossed... " I thought as I handed it in, "they might even 
let me go on telly to talk about it... "

· John O'Farrell's new novel This Is Your Life is published this week by 
Doubleday £10.99
 