
There are now just under two months to go until Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
hits cinemas. Websites have beencrashing under the weight of demand for tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/new-star-wars-the-force-awakens-film-tickets-poster-high-demand>
, a new poster almost broke the internet and there’s still no obvious sign of 
Mark Hamill’s veteran Jedi master. Or is there? Here’s what we picked up from 
the new trailer.

Daisy Ridley’s Rey could be The Force Awakens’ Luke Skywalker
 I’m a survivor … Daisy Ridley as Rey. Photograph: YouTube 
She’s described on the official Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> site as a “resilient survivor, a 
scavenger toughened by a lifetime of dealing with the cutthroats of the harsh 
desert world of Jakku”. But surely there’s something more to this ambitious, 
staff-wielding young woman? A figure who appears to be a masked Rey is seen 
exploring a giant space structure in the trailer’s opening seconds, which 
surely puts her front and centre for Abrams’s movie.

Demand for new Star Wars film tickets prompts site crashes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/new-star-wars-the-force-awakens-film-tickets-poster-high-demand>
We also see her looking up at the skies as a spacecraft takes off for another 
planet, much as Skywalker once did in 1977’s Star Wars. And it’s hard to 
believe she’s really “no one”, as Rey tells an unseen figure. When a voice 
suggests: “The Force … it’s calling to you”, it seems likely that Ridley’s 
character is being addressed, even if John Boyega’s Finn is the one seen 
wielding a natty blue lightsaber.

Kylo Ren sounds nothing like Adam Driver, but a lot like Darth Vader
 Loving a bit of Darth … Adam Driver as Kylo Ren. Photograph: YouTube 
Abrams has already revealed in interviews that Kylo Ren is something of an 
evil Empire fanboy, but the new trailer shows just how much Vader worshipping 
has been going on since the events of 1983’sReturn of the Jedi 
<http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Star_Wars:_Episode_VI_Return_of_the_Jedi>. The 
crumpled, ruined mask of the former Sith lord has been enshrined on its own 
plinth by the nefarious First Order, with Ren promising to further the work of 
his predecessor as master of the dark side.

Through his own mask, Driver is barely recognisable from his previous film and 
television roles, essaying an unexpectedly deep James Earl Jones-style baritone 
– even if his version doesn’t quite have the original actor’s velvety veneer. 
And Abrams is clear that Ren is no geeky lightweight: the new villain appears 
to have mastered Vader’s infamous death choke and is keen to use it on poor old 
Oscar Isaac’s Poe Dameron.

Harrison Ford’s Han Solo is a key character
 Link to the original story … Harrison Ford as Han Solo. Photograph: YouTube 
Harrison Ford’s wily old space scoundrel was a cynical Force denier in the 
original trilogy, but has now been retooled as the conduit for Rey, Finn (and 
us) to scrub up on our Star Wars history. He’s also seen slipping back into his 
old role of comforter to Carrie Fisher’s Princess Leia at a time of sorrow and 
stress. The Millennium Falcon is shown dozens of times zipping across the sky 
and blasting away TIE fighters, so expect Ford to be one of the leads.

Is Luke Skywalker in the trailer after all?
 Is this Luke Skywalker? Photograph: YouTube 
He was mysteriously absent from the official poster and doesn’t seem to be in 
the new trailer either, at first glance. But who’s that cloaked figure placing 
his black mechanical hand on R2-D2? Skywalker famously lost his hand in a 
battle with Vader at the end of The Empire Strikes Back, though his replacement 
was flesh-toned at the time. It could be Ren, of course, but Anakin Skywalker 
also lost a hand in the prequels – the enigma deepens.

The sense of nostalgia is almost overwhelming
 A key battle scene. Photograph: YouTube 
From all those shots of TIE fighters, X-wings and the Millennium Falcon 
scurrying across laser-smeared skies, to Ren’s Vader worship and Solo’s new 
role as link to the original trilogy, Abrams seemsto be harking back to George 
Lucas’s early films at every opportunity. But The Force Awakens also has its 
own look: the new Stormtroopers have a shiny, smooth, iMac-like appearance, 
that clunky giant red droid at 1:38 is super cool, andBB-8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/star-wars-droid-bb-8-is-real-you-can-take-him-home-sphero-disney>
 already looks like a new favourite.

Abrams is holding back plenty of revelations for 17 December 

You have to hand it to the film-maker and the marketing people at 
Lucasfilm/Disney. Despite the first teaser trailer having been released almost 
a year ago, and numerous Star Wars specials in US and UK magazines, we still 
don’t have much of a clue about many of the key characters inStar Wars: The 
Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>. Where 
were Lupita Nyong’o’s Maz Kanata, Domhnall Gleeson’s General Hux and Andy 
Serkis’s Supreme Leader Snoke, rumoured to be Kylo Ren’s boss, in the new 
trailer? Max von Sydow’s unnamed character is also missing, and we get just a 
fleeting glimpse of Gwendoline Christie’s Captain Phasma - though we’ve seen 
photographs of the latter before. What this means – providing nothing changes 
in the next two months – is that viewers will be walking into the cinema in 
December with a genuine sense of anticipation, rather than the feeling that 
they’ve already seen most of the action in trailers and clips. Even Yoda would 
have struggled to predict that.
 