
The privatisation of state services is a reflection of two problems in 
Britain. The first is the undermining of the notion of the "state" and its role 
as regulator and guardian of the public realm and the repository of moral and 
ethical values distinct from those of the "market". In the UK, the study of 
public administration has all but disappeared, to be replaced by the 
application of business administration/management concepts to the functioning 
of state agencies, policymaking and the way politicians see their role, eg. the 
prime minister leading delegations of arms dealers to the Middle East.

The second is the state of British capitalism. Manufacturing has been hollowed 
out, banking transformed into a form of gambling, and large budgets and easy 
profits for questionable performance have become the norm across much of our 
private sector. The sequestration of state services by private capital via 
their political placemen and women all seems logical. Yet this will transform 
the role, function and capacity of the state. Our already poor quality public 
services will be further cheapened, and those at the helm of corporations will 
expropriate even more wealth. The result will be a further drop in the 
competence and performance of the state in health and wellbeing measures for 
the average citizen: from first world to third world in one easy move. A 
remarkable transformation of a country that is already struggling to keep up 
with its European competitors.
Dr Allan McNaught
London

• Professor Kay's interim report is right to call for financial markets to 
reconnect with their core social purpose (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/feb/29/vince-cable-kay-review-stock-markets>
, 1 March). But although its proposed structural changes will help, they fail 
to address one of the foundations underpinning the financial crisis – the 
education of our business leaders. Creating a responsible capitalism requires a 
fundamental mind shift in business thinking that must begin in the lecture 
hall. The UN princ–iples of responsible management education aim to inspire 
responsible management education, research and thought leadership globally. 
Aston University was one of the first to sign up to these, although many 
education institutions in the UK, and globally, have not. Reform needs to be 
coupled with a real change in how our future business leaders are educated. By 
doing so, we may avert future financial crises like the one we face now.
Carole Parkes
Aston University Business School 
<http://www1.aston.ac.uk/abs/?utm_source=homepage-www-abs&utm_medium=weblink&utm_campaign=www.abs.aston.acuk>
 