



Stephen Mangan will play Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> in a new ITV drama, 
Houdini & Doyle, in which the Sherlock Holmes creator will be joined by Harry 
Houdini as an odd couple pair of super sleuths.

Mangan, star of Episodes and Green Wing, will be joined by Michael Weston 
(House, Six Feet Under) as the master illusionist in the 10-part series that 
will premiere on ITV’s sister channel, ITV Encore.

A story of “real life friends, real life adversaries and real life crime 
solvers”, the drama pitches them as a mismatched detective duo, Conan Doyle a 
passionate believer in the paranormal, Houdini refusing to believe that there 
is anything supernatural about magic.

“This fundamental difference between the two men leads to conflict, humour and 
competition,” said ITV on Wednesday.

“High-minded competition in the pursuit of the truth, and ridiculous petty 
competition – because they’re guys. But despite all this, they need each other. 
Doyle needs Houdini because he is gullible. Houdini needs Doyle because he is 
wrong.”

It is the latest sign of our enduring fascination with Sherlock Holmes, from 
BBC1’s update starring Benedict Cumberbatch (and subsequent US reboot with 
Johnny Lee Miller) to BBC Films’ Mr Holmes, starring Ian McKellan.

Earlier this year ITV also showed an adaptation of Julian Barnes’ Arthur and 
George, in which Conan Doyle took a central role, played by Martin Clunes.

Houdini & Doyle, which will air next year, is executive produced by David 
Shore, creator of House, the long-running Hugh Laurie medical drama, which 
ended three years ago.

A UK/Canada co-production made by Big Talk Productions (Rev, Shaun of the 
Dead) in the UK and Shaftesbury in Canada, it is written and created by Shore’s 
long-time collaborator David Hoselton and Canadian screenwriter David Titcher.

ITV said the drama would “draw heavily on the rich history of the period”. 

“At the turn of the 20th century the Metropolitan police, mired in the ways of 
the 19th century, were overwhelmed with bizarre and often inexplicable cases so 
they turned to outsiders, including, believe it or not, Houdini and Doyle, who 
collaborated with New Scotland Yard on some unsolved and inexplicable crimes,” 
it said.

“What can we believe? What should we believe? Is cynicism to be admired or is 
it what makes us human? Is reason the antithesis of hope?”

The series will co-star Canadian newcomer Rebecca Liddiard as constable 
Adelaide Stratton, the first female PC ever to work for the Met police, and Tim 
McInnerny as inspector Horace Merring.
 