
My happiest memories as a child are of long, endless holidays to Mayo, in the 
west of Ireland, in the days when there were only B roads and it was an odyssey 
getting there. We would be crammed into my mum’s Morris Minor Traveller and I’d 
be wedged between the luggage in the boot.

I grew up in Middleton 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Middleton,_Greater_Manchester>, a suburban town 
north of Manchester where I had a happy childhood. It was a noisy household – 
I’m the third of six children and there were two more kids because my parents 
fostered as well. Meal times were boisterous, happy occasions with plenty of 
robust banter across the table and we loved playing on the pinball machine in 
the kitchen. One day, a policeman called round to take a witness statement 
after a car accident outside; he came inside and thought it was some kind of 
government-funded community centre because of all the activity going on.

It wasn’t difficult being part of a large family with foster children. But 
there was little time for one-to-one molly-coddling. I felt my parents were 
more tolerant of misbehaviour from their foster children, who could be from 
troubled backgrounds, than us. I thought there should be one rule for all.

My parents are quietly moral. They are church-going Catholics who imparted 
Christian, social values on us, but didn’t crow about it. We were brought up to 
care for the disempowered and disenfranchised; those who are neglected, 
forgotten and living in poverty. They taught me to think about those people; 
not to be selfish or self-obsessed and to be kind to others. I felt part of a 
solid family unit and I never doubted the security of where I was. It wasn’t 
pious – there was a lot of laughter at home and a love of comedy. We sat down 
as a family to watch television – current affairs and shows like Dad’s Army and 
Porridge.

My mum, Kathleen, was raised in Ireland, but you never heard her Irish accent 
– except when she was on the phone to someone in Ireland. I used to run home 
from school at lunchtime to spend an hour with her. After lunch, we would watch 
the afternoon news together. She made sure family and friends could just turn 
up unannounced; they were made to feel comfortable and welcomed. It was an 
open-door policy.

Dad, Tony, is a retired engineer who is fascinated by science. He worked to 
give us a decent lifestyle. He never disappeared down the pub – didn’t drink or 
smoke. After work, he’d change into his boiler suit to do improvements around 
the house.

Clare was the one authentic part of my life that kept me sane

The knowledge that my family has always been there for me brings authenticity 
to the world that I live in, which can be tough and unforgiving of failure. I 
have an identity now because of what I do but, growing up, I was always one of 
the Coogans – and that meant a lot to me. I knew I was part of a family and 
today they help me by knowing they are still there.

Becoming a father to my daughter Clare is the most important relationship of 
my life. At the time, I probably wasn’t ready to become a father because of the 
instability of my existence. I’d had lots of personal problems and went through 
some difficult times. Clare was the one authentic part of my life that kept me 
sane. She’s 19 now and has a good heart. I see in her someone with a sense of 
fairness, kindness and humour, which she gets from her mother – and I hope from 
me.

My parents have been married for 58 years and live in the same house I grew up 
in. When I go back to visit, I sleep in the same room where I was born. Even 
now, at 50, it all feels like a touchstone because nothing much has changed; it 
remains a constant in my turbulent life, which I feel fortunate to have.

• Alan Partidge’s Scissored Isle is on Sky Atlantic, 10pm on 30 May. Easily 
Distracted, <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413469/> 
by Steve Coogan (Arrow Books, £8.99), is published on 14 July
 