
I have had death on my mind rather a lot recently.

In the past few weeks my uncle died and my mother, who is 75, has been 
increasingly peppering her conversations with reflections about her life and 
references to death. I find myself grimly absorbing the latest news on how our 
genes determine the likelihood of life-threatening illnesses and reflecting on 
the fact that since my father died at 62 and I am 37 this means I have maybe 
only 25 years left, possibly more and possibly less.

I haven't thought about death this hard since the aftermath of my father's 
death 13 years ago. His sudden and wholly unexpected death had torn my life 
apart, and I was finding it hard to process the loss and accept the finality of 
it. Muslim tradition demanded that he be buried the day after his death and as 
my brother and I helped lower his coffin into the ground, I remember thinking 
"is this really it?" Is this all that life amounts to, the struggle and the 
toil to raise a family and build a home and this is where that journey 
ultimately ends: a hole in the ground.

I found the starkness unsettling; I wanted to believe that my father was not 
truly gone and that was why I decided to visit a medium. I decided not to tell 
her the purpose of my visit and tried to give as little information beforehand 
as possible, since I was deeply sceptical of all things supernatural. The 
medium sat in front of me and began talking about my parents and referred to 
both my mother and my father. This all occurred some years ago and I cannot 
recall what she said precisely, but I do remember the disappointment I felt on 
realising that the medium had not even managed to pick up that my father was no 
longer alive. In the end I had to tell her that he had died whereupon she tried 
feebly to pretend that she had known this all the time but did not make any 
distinction between those who had passed onto the other side and those who were 
still here on earth. I left her home with my worst suspicions confirmed that 
there probably is nothing after this life.

I returned to normal life and have spent the intervening years trying my best 
to not think about the grim lesson I learnt that day, but in recent weeks this 
has become increasingly difficult. This is not only because of the death of my 
uncle but also because of the intensely irritatingposters I keep seeing on 
London buses <http://www.atheistbus.org.uk/> that suggest that since there 
probably isn't a God I should stop worrying and start enjoying my life.

There are few things less likely to cheer one up than musing on the fragility 
and finality of life so I am a loss as to why this not something to worry 
about. It is one thing to accept that there probably isn't a God – a view I can 
completely understand – and another to demand that one stop worrying and 
celebrate this.

What on earth is there to celebrate? We're talking about death, about not 
existing, being wiped out for ever. And it can happen any time. If that's not a 
cause for worry what is? Maybe the atheists are right and this life is all 
there is, but given a choice between believing that there is something else and 
thinking there is nothing else I would plump for the hope that there is more. I 
have not seen any evidence to suggest that this is a well-founded hope but for 
me that only prompts disappointment, rather than the unfettered joy that 
militant atheism appears to demand.

It is easy to demonise all believers as illiberal – harder perhaps with the 
election of Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jan/22/religion-barack-obama-inauguration>
 – and of course religion can be blamed for many things. And for some Islam can 
be blamed more than others. Yet if I am being totally honest, I envy true 
believers their certainties. If I could reclaim one thing from my own past it 
would be that very faith.

I suspect they will never admit it but I wonder if this new, shall we say 
fundamentalist, strain of atheism masks envy in the minds of these confirmed 
non-believers. Believers can take comfort in certainty; atheists have to take 
solace in the fact that life is short and then you die. That may be the truth 
but, my question is, how is that meant to cheer us up?
 