
Sturgis had always known it was his destiny to end up as one of Anita 
Brookner's characters. In his 70s, repressed, depressed and childless, he lived 
alone in his south Kensington flat. He had one relative, a cousin by marriage, 
who lived miles away in Hampstead, whom he would visit every six weeks or so on 
a Sunday. Today was such a day.

"Hello, Helena," he said. "Have you done anything interesting?"

"No," she replied.

"Me neither. I'd best be going."

Relieved that the enforced intimacies were at an end, Sturgis picked up his 
anorak and took the bus home. He supposed there were others like him who had 
reached an age where everything felt impossible, but as he never talked to 
anyone he couldn't be quite certain. "You're too nice," had been the parting 
accusation of his second great love - the first having been his hamster - and 
for the last 40 years he'd never done anything at all apart from work in a 
bank. And since he'd been forced into retirement, even that excitement had been 
denied him.

He needed a conversation, he thought. Perhaps Christmas in Venice would do him 
good. "I'm Vicky Gardner," said the woman in the seat next to him on the flight 
out. "I'm a lonely childless divorcee. How about you?"

"I'm just filling in time before I die," he replied.

For several days he contentedly did nothing at the Danieli, before venturing 
out to St Mark's Square on his last morning. To his surprise, Mrs Gardner 
happened to be there. He observed she had probably been attractive once, but 
that now she was in her early 50s she was as moribund as him.

"We should meet in London," he said reluctantly, hoping she would decline, 
when she informed him she lived near south Kensington.

"That would be nice," she answered.

He had been tempted not to answer the telephone, fearing it might be Mrs 
Gardner, but had done so anyway and now found himself taking her on a long 
walk, followed by tea at Brown's.

"Would you like to ... ?" she asked, gesturing towards the bed, after they had 
returned to his flat for a glass of sherry. "Good god, no," he replied. "You're 
falling apart and I'm falling apart. You'd better go now."

He wondered whether perhaps he had been a little blunt, but felt it was for 
the best.

Several weeks later the phone rang again. It was the hospital. Helena had died 
unexpectedly. "Oh dear," he said. "That means I'm going to have to organise the 
funeral and inherit her flat."

"You're still too nice." It was Sarah, his second great love. She looked as 
decrepit and lonely as him. "My husband died and I'm very ill and childless," 
she added.

He supposed he ought to ask her about her illness, but he couldn't be 
bothered, so he shrugged and muttered something about the weather.

"I need somewhere to live," said Vicky. He hoped she wasn't angling to move 
in. "You can stay in my dead cousin's flat for a bit," he shrugged.

"I think I left the shed unlocked at my house outside Nice," Sarah muttered. 
He didn't know quite why he flew out to Nice alone the next day, but guessed it 
must have something to do with being a doormat. "Typical," he thought. "It was 
locked after all."

His phone rang. It was Vicky. "Can I leave a bag with you?" Why was she so 
needy? He was going to have to sell Helena's flat and get rid of her.

"We've been seeing too much of each other," said Sarah on his return. "We need 
a break."

"I couldn't agree more." He smiled for the first time in the book. The phone 
rang. He didn't answer it. Phew! Not long to go now until he died.

The digested read, digested: Abandon hope all ye who enter here.
 