

The bullish, combative and lengendary Art Blakey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-blakey> ... a bandleader with an uncanny 
talent-spotting ability. Photograph: Bill Spilka/Getty

Clark Tracey <http://www.clarktracey.com>, the British jazz drummer, staged a 
four-night party to celebrate his 30-year career at Soho's Pizza Express Jazz 
Club last week. But it was a mini-season with a difference - Tracey didn't just 
set the shows up as workouts for his current band, but as reunions for three 
powerful groups he's led over a busy career since his famous pianist father 
Stan hauled him onstage as a nervous 17-year-old back in 1978.

Guy Barker <http://www.guybarker.co.uk>, the now internationally acclaimed 
British trumpeter/composer, was a comparative unknown when he started out in 
one of Clark Tracey's early groups, and played at the first of the reunion 
gigs. During the interval, Barker reminded me of the influence the legendary 
Pittsburgh musician Art Blakey had had on Tracey, both as a drummer and as a 
bandleader whose signature quality was uncanny talent-spotting, coupled with 
the realism to understand that young talent quickly moves on.

The informal youth-opportunities scheme of Blakey's earthy and thrilling Jazz 
Messengers group saw everyone from Wayne Shorter to a teenage Wynton Marsalis 
passing through the ranks. In hiring Guy Barker in the 1980s, and such 
innovative pianists as former Perrier Award-winnerZoe Rahman 
<http://www.zoerahman.com> and Empirical's intriguing Kit Downes 
<http://www.myspace.com/kitsmusic>, Tracey has been doing Blakey's job - and 
with broadly similar musical materials - for the UK scene.

Catalysts like Tracey and Blakey - who died in 1990, after having launched new 
jazz stars for over 30 years - provide crucial exposure for unknowns. Today, 
with conservatoires turning out scores of highly-trained and eager jazz 
musicians for whom there are precious few gigs, the role is growing in 
importance.

The two men could hardly have had more contrasting personalities. Tracey is a 
selfless ensemble drummer, and a modestly broadminded individual who declares 
his amazement at the ideas his partners bring to the bandstand, and his hope 
that they'll force him to change his musical habits. Blakey was combative, 
bullish, and a very tough taskmaster from an old showbiz school. Legend had it 
that he was a pianist once, but a gangster promoter who already had a pianist 
invited Blakey to take up drums by pointing a gun at him.

At a BBC show in the 80s, he refused to share a dressing-room with his band 
("I ain't sittin' in here with these mothers") because it was a sign of 
disrespect not to give the boss his own room. When I interviewed him for the 
show, he was a nightmare in the run-through ("You don't know nuthin' about our 
music") and a breeze on the real take, having made his point that he was a man 
the media should step aside for.

But on a bandstand, when it counted, Art Blakey was generous and open in what 
he did, rather than what he said. He wanted to help the music grow, as it 
always must. That's the way Clark Tracey views it too - and since he passes on 
that baton to the young players he recruits (Guy Barker is a prime example), 
jazz is going to be around for very a long time.
 