
Ritual human sacrifice played a powerful role in the construction and 
maintenance of stratified societies, according to new research.

The more egalitarian the society, the less likely it was that a human being 
would be chosen to die for it; the more stratified and rigid, the more likely 
someone from the lower orders would be selected as a sacrificial victim, 
scientists from Australian and New Zealand report.

Why the Incas offered up child sacrifices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/04/why-incas-performed-human-sacrifice>
They analysed data and observations from 93 traditional cultures that 
flourished from Taiwan to Madagascar, and from New Zealand to Hawaii to Easter 
Island, to confirm the hypothesis that human sacrifice “stabilises social 
stratification once stratification has arisen, and promotes a shift to strictly 
inherited class systems.”

And they add, in their paper in Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature17159>: “Whilst evolutionary 
theories of religion have focused on the functionality of prosocial and moral 
beliefs, our results reveal a darker link between religion and the evolution of 
modern hierarchical societies.”

Joseph Watts of the University of Auckland and colleagues acknowledge that 
human sacrifice featured in many early human societies: Germanic, Arab, Turkic, 
Inuit, African, Chinese and Japanese, and in North, Central and South America. 
But archaeological records cannot always distinguish between ritual human 
sacrifice and any other violent death.

So they focused on what they called the Austronesian cultures, because these 
have been well-studied, and share a common origin. These cultures spread from 
an ancestral homeland in Taiwan, across a range of environments from tiny 
atolls to continents, and evolved into small, egalitarian, family-based 
cultures and into highly complex political structures, distributed across a 
vast area, encompassing more than half the world’s longitude and a third of its 
latitude.

Religious beliefs were remarkably diverse, but the practice of human sacrifice 
– recorded in 43% of them - was widespread. So were the methods of sacrifice. 
These included “burning, drowning, strangulation, bludgeoning, burial, being 
crushed under a newly built canoe, being cut to pieces, as well as being rolled 
off the roof of a house and then decapitated.”

Aztec skull trophy rack discovered at Mexico City’s Templo Mayor ruin site
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/21/aztec-skull-trophy-rack-discovered-mexico-citys-templo-mayor-ruin-site>
And there was a lot of overlap between religious and political authority. “For 
example in Polynesia, it was often believed chiefs were descended from gods. 
Human sacrifices were generally orchestrated by social elites such as chiefs or 
priests and victims were chosen from the low status groups such as slaves or 
captives,” says Watts.

“In this study, we didn’t really look at the vestiges of human sacrifice in 
modern societies, though that is an interesting question.”

They identified 20 egalitarian societies, and found that human sacrifice had 
been practiced in just five of them. They identified 27 highly stratified 
societies, and found that 18 of them depended on ritual human sacrifice. But 
although the study has implications for modern political systems, the 
researchers are not talking about Downton Abbey, or the court of Louis XIV.

“For a death to be called human sacrifice it must be religiously motivated,” 
Watts says. “While human sacrifice is not used for control in modern societies, 
religion more broadly could still serve this function. Our study highlights how 
religion is vulnerable to exploitation by social elites and can become a tool 
for building and maintaining social control – the use of human sacrifice as a 
means of social control provides a grisly example of just how far this can go.”
 