
The debate over higher tuition fees has naturally focused on the impact of 
rising costs on application rates and student expectations, but where are 
alumni relations in the post-tuition-rise mix?

No one in academia wants to see university education turned into a commodity 
but the reality of higher fees is that students are all too often working out 
how they can extract as much value as they can from an investment in their 
education. Pole position in league tables, new buildings, accreditations and 
the promise of an enhanced student experience will always attract new students 
– such factors are critical when it comes to universities seeking to be 
different.

So, too – as David Willetts and others have emphasised – will be more 
transparent data regarding employability of graduates from university to 
university. However, students are coming to expect much more than just 
information, they are seeking direct involvement from alumni. Prospective 
students are increasingly seeking to understand and see the quality of those 
who have graduated before and what they have since achieved. Incoming cohorts 
want reassurance that alumni will play an active role in their career 
development, mainly through opening up their networks of influence and sharing 
their own real experiences – all of which can help students improve their job 
prospects. In essence, they want to leverage alumni to support their own 
employability.

The game is changing. Alumni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/alumni> were once seen, 
first and foremost, in terms of their potential as benefactors, rewarding 
institutions with endowments in return for some kind of personal gratification 
or institutional recognition, whether the naming of a building, funding of an 
academic post and so forth. Indeed, alumni are still a critical element to any 
university's development strategy, but they have an increasingly important role 
to play in how institutions are responding to and meeting the changing 
expectations of their students now.

At Brunel Business School, <http://www.brunel.ac.uk/bbs> for example, we are 
enhancing the traditional view of alumni as a benefactor-driven activity 
through embracing the needs of existing students that want to connect with past 
graduates as part of their own development. This is being achieved through the 
launch of an online mentoring platform for ourMasters in Management students. 
<http://www.mimcommunity.org/>

This approach embraces the principles of social networking and creates a 
course-specific community. It's an environment where alumni offer themselves as 
a learning resource that extends students' experience into professional 
practice. By bringing these communities together, students are able to explore 
industry sectors and discuss different career paths, whilst allowing alumni to 
provide advice, perspectives, and play a role in student life.

While getting alumni involved in student recruitment and mentoring is in 
itself not new, where Brunel is different is in the creation of a social 
networking environment where alumni provide more than just 'information' in a 
traditional push format. Rather, they offer direct involvement through their 
own case history that supports both peer relationship and community building. 
In doing so, we are responding to the game-change being prompted by our 
incoming student body to enable a seamless link between those joining 
university and those who have already graduated.

This kind of engagement and interaction needs to be the backdrop against which 
existing students see themselves develop, whether through mentoring each other 
during study or mentoring successive generations of future students. It is 
important for universities to influence the way students see themselves whilst 
studying – that is, as having something worthwhile to give – as this will 
influence the way they see themselves once they graduate and become alumni 
themselves. This investment in building and, crucially, maintaining these 
long-term relationships needs to be made now.

Professor Zahir Irani is head of Brunel Business School at Brunel University 
<http://www.brunel.ac.uk/bbs> - follow it on Twitter @brunelbusiness 
<http://twitter.com/brunelbusiness>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 