
After months in which the battle over tuition fees has left Britain's student 
movement battered and divided, the challenge of steering the NUS in a time of 
austerity could go to a candidate who has never been to university.

Shane Chowen, 22, who has four science A-levels from City College Plymouth, is 
the frontrunner in the race to be the next NUS president, a contest which will 
be decided when student delegates gather for a national conference in Gateshead 
this week.

The new president will take over from Aaron Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, who decided against 
seeking re-election after facing fierce criticism that he had not done enough 
to stop the tripling of university tuition fees.

If elected, Chowen would be the first NUS president without a degree. He 
argues that university students made common cause with further education 
colleges over fees.

"I'm coming from the background of the majority of NUS members – two-thirds of 
NUS members are in FE," said Chowen, who is currently vice-president for 
further education.

His close relationship with Porter – the outgoing NUS president has endorsed 
him – may tarnish him in some eyes. The split in the student movement was laid 
bare after the NUS leadership took several days to show public support for 
direct action protest. Porter was also criticised for failing to attend the 
national day of action at which students were kettled for hours.

Chowen said he was not "romantic" about university occupations. "I see them as 
a valid form of protest, a way of creating change, but only in certain 
circumstances."

He agrees that it is vital the NUS reaches out to the left of the student 
movement. At present, he says, there's an "us and them culture".

If elected, he will campaign for the creation of an education system that "no 
longer has an academic, vocational divide". He said: "It's actually a class 
divide that starts at school, is reinforced at college and reinforced again at 
university. I want middle-class families to be OK with their young people 
coming home and saying, I want to do an apprenticeship."

His closest rival is Liam Burns, 26, a physics graduate from Heriot-Watt 
university and the current president of NUS Scotland.

Both candidates oppose tuition fees, and argue that the rush by universities 
to charge the maximum fee will help to expose how a market in higher education 
is untenable.

Burns said: "I don't think they're a done deal for very long. I don't think 
I've ever seen legislation be so shaky in terms of implementation as fees."

He is critical of the NUS's current leadership for allowing a rift to grow in 
the opposition to fees. "The NUS has retrenched back into the old narrative 
that there is a hard left and moderates, and that we have to do everything we 
can to marginalise them," he said.

"When we said we condemned everything that happened at Millbank, that was 30 
or 40 people who were smashing windows. But there are far more people who have 
an affinity with direct action and we have to reach out to them."

Also standing in the election is Mark Bergfeld, a member of the Socialist 
Workers Party, and Thomas Byrne, a Conservative supporter who backs the tuition 
fees rise. The battle over fees is unlikely to be revisited in the lifetime of 
this parliament. A bigger challenge for the next NUS president will be the 
threat of diminished teaching hours at universities as government cuts bite.

Student places could also be cut at institutions that ministers regard as 
over-priced. Wes Streeting, a former NUS president and now chief executive of 
the Helena Kennedy Foundation, said: "I think they're going to be confronted 
with an immediate change which will shift the debate. There will be a 
university places crisis if [business secretary] Vince Cable follows through on 
the threat to cut places.

"Much as they may want to challenge the fees model, the threat of cutting 
places is a serious threat to the widening participation agenda, and something 
I'm sure the NUS will have something to say about."
 