
As the drains clog and your next-door neighbour watches full-volume TV at 3am, 
the desire to leave student halls can intensify. But should you take your 
friends with you? I moved in with a few of my besties, and it’s had its pros 
and cons.

One of the obvious benefits to living with friends is that you’re rarely 
lonely. You always have someone around to talk to. It’s good to share your 
worries or problems with other people.

Jessie Williams, who studies at City University London, agrees: “I think 
living with people also helps you learn to compromise, share things, and make 
an effort to talk to them even when you don’t feel like socialising,” she says.

​It’s true that you pick up on habits that you didn't notice before

However, you should be willing to make a few sacrifices. For one, you may have 
to adapt your lifestyle in certain ways. One of my roommates is very conscious 
of cleanliness, while my other roommate’s definition of a “tidy” room is a 
nearly-visible carpet. I fall somewhere in the middle, so we’ve all had to 
rethink our standards a bit.

Then there’s the matter of privacy. This is particularly true when your friend 
has their friends round – of whom you may not be such a fan – and they’re using 
the common areas of the flat. This can become a real problem when it’s exam 
season. A house party the night before someone’s big essay is never good for 
housemate relations. And once there’s beef in the flat, it can be hard to get 
away from.

'My long-distance relationship wasn't cheap': students share budgeting tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/27/my-long-distance-relationship-wasnt-cheap-students-share-budgeting-tips>
It’s true that you learn things about your friends when they’re around you 
24/7 that you didn’t pick up on before. You start to notice their habits. They 
leave the lid off the butter; they hog the washing machine; they breathe too 
loudly – and it can feel overbearing.

If, in your view, these cons outweigh the pros, living with strangers might be 
ideal. It could well be better to meet someone new and dislike them than to let 
overfamiliarity sour your existing friendships.

Or another alternative – if you can afford it – could be to live alone. It 
undoubtedly gives you some freedom. Natalie Mallari, who studies at Sciences Po 
University in France, had originally planned to live with friends, but changed 
her mind at the last moment. “It’s wonderful to be able to have a place by 
yourself, which you can make your own and in which you can follow your own 
rhythm,” she says.

When people ask whether she regrets not living with friends, Natalie points 
out that the distance actually encourages her to maintain close relationships 
with those she cares about. “If anything,” she says, “I feel that my 
friendships are much stronger because I chose to live alone in second year.”

Students: 10 things to consider before renting for the first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/30/10-things-to-consider-before-renting-for-the-first-time>
However, even lone wolves can get lonely. William Labasi-Sammartino, who also 
lives alone while studying at Sciences Po, admits he may be missing out on the 
opportunity to create special relationships with others.

“Being roommates with other people helps create bonds which can’t be created 
otherwise,” he says. “But I still think living alone was a good decision. It 
saves me a lot of time in terms of negotiating with roommates. There is no 
arguing on who needs to clean up, on who ate this or that, or on who is 
responsible for taking out the trash.”

So there’s plenty to consider when deciding which option suits you and will 
make you happiest. Personally, I don’t regret my choice. So far.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 