
Sudan rallied twice to salvage a 2-2 draw against Angola in the Africa Cup of 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> to retain 
faint hopes of a quarter-final berth.

Manucho gave Angola the lead in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, with a low strike 
in the fifth minute after poor defending, before Mohamed Ahmed Bashir headed 
the equaliser in the 33rd. Manucho putAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> back in front with a 50th-minute 
penalty but Ahmed Bashir scored his second in the 73rd to earn the draw.

The result leaves Angola well-placed to progress with four points from two 
games, whileSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sudan> have one point 
and must beat Burkina Faso in their last match to have any chance of 
qualifying. The Angola coach, Lito Vidigal, said: "We will keep fighting."

Burkina Faso play the pre-tournament favourites, Ivory Coast, in the other 
Group B match later on Thursday at the same Nuevo Estadio de Malabo.

The Sudan coach, Mohamed Abdallah, made two changes from the 1-0 defeat 
against Ivory Coast, preferring Akram Elhadi Salim in goal and bringing in the 
midfielder Mohamed Tahir.

Vidigal named an unchanged lineup from the 2-1 win against Burkina Faso, 
resisting the temptation to include the former Germany youth international 
Nando Rafael, who received clearance to play earlier in the week.

Attendance was again disappointing for the match, with a pocket of around 500 
Angola fans on the halfway line but thousands of empty seats elsewhere. Those 
Angola supporters were soon celebrating when their side took the lead thanks to 
a glaring error from the Sudan defender Nagm Eldin Abdalla.

Manucho took the ball as the defender tried to turn and advanced into the 
penalty area to drill a low shot into the corner for his second goal at the 
tournament.

The equaliser came when Mudather Eltaib crossed from the right and Ahmed 
Bashir rose above the defence to send a glancing header just inside the post. 
It was Sudan's first goal in the finals since 1976.

Vidigal sent Rafael on for his debut in the second half and five minutes into 
the second period Djalma was tripped in the box by the Sudan defender Nazar 
Hamid.

Manucho side-footed the spot kick to the goalkeeper's right to restore 
Angola's lead. Again, however, Angola made the mistake of sitting back and 
Ahmed Bashir volleyed into the net to level for the second time after José 
Vinguidica failed to clear.

"We made a mistake and Sudan took advantage to score," Angola's captain, André 
Macanga, said. "It's a very fair result. We depend on ourselves, there's still 
a long way to go in this tournament."
 