
Before Monday night it had been 42 years since Sudan had last won a game at the
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>. 
Now, thanks to Mudathir El Tahir's two goals against Burkina Faso and Angola's 
supine display against the Ivory Coast, they are in the quarter-final, where 
they will face Zambia. It is deserved progress, too; Sudan have lacked a little 
self-belief and did their best to self-destruct against Angola, but when they 
have forgotten themselves and simply played, the Falcons of Jediane (they used 
to be the Nile Crocodiles, but have rebranded since the split with the south) 
have been the most coherent passing side in Group B, more fluent even than the 
self-conscious Ivorians.

Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angola> have been something of a 
myth at this tournament. They came with a swagger, vast crews of radio 
journalists and around 700 fans paid for by the Angolan government, who gave 
their thanks with a large banner bearing a portrait of the president, José 
Manuel Dos Santos. There was a widespread assumption before Monday's game 
against the Ivory Coast that their progress was a formality, that, for the 
third tournament running, they would pass unbeaten through the group stage. 
Perhaps even the players believed it; certainly there was little sense of 
urgency on the pitch.

There was little to justify such confidence, though. They beat Burkina Faso – 
probably, Senegal aside, the most disappointing team here in terms of ability 
compared to output – thanks to two defensive errors that handed them possession 
in dangerous areas. AgainstSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sudan>, 
they again benefited from an opponent in generous mood, Nagm Eldin being 
dispossessed by Manucho just outside his own penalty area, then Hamid Nazar 
making a clumsy and needless challenge on Djalma to gift them a spot-kick.

Against an Ivory Coast B team, playing at little more than walking pace, all 
their limitations were exposed. The second goal, in particular, was 
embarrassing: a long ball from Abdulkader Keïta that prompted panic, leading to 
Dani Mussunguna heading over his goalkeeper, Wilson, so that Wilfried Bony 
could run on and jab over the line from two yards. It was a horrible, 
humiliating goal, and the fact that Sudan's second against Burkina Faso came 
from an almost identical long ball converted by Mudathir as the goalkeeper 
Daouda Diakité hesitated only made it worse.

Fury, perhaps embarrassment, at their exit led to extraordinary scenes in the 
mixed zone. The mixed zone is a designated area between the dressing room and 
the team bus through which all players are supposed to walk so that 
journalists, who stand on the other side of a barrier, have the opportunity to 
speak to them. They are mandatory after all matches at international 
tournaments and, while they have tended to be chaotic to the point of 
near-uselessness in previous Cups of Nations, in Malabo they've worked quite 
well.

But on Monday night, Angolan riot police, on secondment to Equatorial Guinea 
to help with crowd control, lined up between journalists and players making any 
interaction impossible. Manucho tried to stop, but police intervened. When an 
Angolan television journalist protested, he was told that if his channel showed 
any footage of the police intervention, he would be punished. As a display of 
sore losing, and of the politicking, blinkered attitudes and plain stupidity 
that infect much of African football, it could hardly have been bettered.

Lito Vidigal, the coach, will not have his contract renewed. Coaches are an 
easy scapegoat, of course, but criticism of him for selecting the same old, 
stale old names is understandable given the way they played, and the fact he 
selected nobody from either of the past two teams to win the Angolan 
championship, Inter de Luanda and Recreativo Libolo.

That's the negative. The great positive is Sudan, who perhaps offer a model 
for development. When they won the tournament on home soil in 1970, they were 
continental giants, one of the founder members of the Confederation of African 
Football, and inspired by one of the all-time great African centre-forwards, 
Ali Gagarin – although he was still edging towards his peak at that stage and 
didn't play in the final.

(Gagarin is worth a feature on his own but, briefly … His real name was Ali 
Haidar Sedique, but his elder brother Jaafar, who played for Al Merreikh, had 
acquired the nickname Gagarin because his pace supposedly reminded fans of the 
cosmonaut. So when Ali came through at Al Merreikh's great rivals, Al Hilal, 
what else would they call him but Ali Gagarin? He later moved to Paris to 
study, and has become a diplomat, serving as Sudan's ambassador to Oman and 
Algeria. He delights in a story of seeing a Cameroonian boy wearing a "Gagarin 
9" shirt at an African Champions Cup game between canon and Al Hilal in Yaoundé 
in 1987; that boy was Samuel Eto'o.)

Al Merreikh and Al Hilal continue to dominate Sudanese football, but what is 
telling is that they have also had some notable results in continental 
competition (Al Hilal were semi-finalists in the Champions League last season 
and in 2009 and in the Confederation Cup in 2010, while Al Merreikh were 
runners-up in the final group stage of the Confederation Cup in 2008 – that is, 
effectively joint-third). At the highest level, the correlation between success 
at club level and with the national side is complex, but equally there is an 
obvious benefit to play development if there is a sound league structure. That 
relative strength was demonstrated by last year's Chan (African Nations 
Championship), the tournament for domestic-based players, in which Sudan – 
admittedly with the advantage of playing at home – finished third.

Tunisia, who won that tournament, also seem to have benefited from a domestic 
core. It would be misleading to portray Sudan as some kind of emerging force 
set to take the world by storm, but their coach, Mohamed Abdallah – who oversaw 
qualification in 2008, was replaced but soon returned – has moulded an 
effective side, albeit one prone to individual errors. Mudathir is the obvious 
star, with his inventiveness and close control, but Mohamed Ahmed Bashir, who 
seems comfortable both on the right and through the middle, has pace and 
physicality, while Haitham Mustafa, the 34-year-old captain, offers a calming 
influence from the centre.

Zambia will begin the quarter-final as clear favourites and their quiet 
efficiency has been impressive, but Sudan are no pushovers. A developing league 
and consistency if not of personnel then at least of philosophy have elevated 
them; the lesson is there for the supposedly great powers.
 