
For Sijjin Kuang the omens were not good. His father had already died at the 
tip of a spear. His mother had just emerged from prison. And he lived in south
Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, where a lethal combination of 
war, disease and an almost complete absence of medical facilities had made the 
region the worst for health anywhere in the world.

Sijjin died on 23 May 2005, seven days after he was born. Malaria was a 
factor, as was the rusty razor blade that was used to cut his umbilical cord 
and caused tetanus.

A child born today in south Sudan might stand a better chance, though not by 
much. A peace agreement to end the two-decade north-south Sudan war, signed 
only months before Sijjin's birth, has held. While the autonomous government of 
south Sudan has made healthcare a priority, the main focus has been security. 
This is understandable, given the history of war and the looming, contentious 
referendum on full independence for the south, scheduled for January 2011. But 
it has meant that progress in delivering basic medical care, particularly in 
the rural areas, where most people live, has been extremely slow.

"When it comes to health, the starting situation five years ago was so bad 
that a lot of the work done since has just been to stop it getting worse," said 
Chris Lewis, emergency health adviser for Save the Children, who lived in south 
Sudan from 2005-08. "It has not got worse, but neither have we seen a 
significant increase in access to health services."

The Sudan household health survey, used to monitor progress towards the 
millennium development goals, was carried out in 2006 – the first such survey 
since war began in the early 80s. It showed why Sijjin's death was little 
surprise.

The mortality rate for under five-year-olds was 135 per 1,000 births – meaning 
a child had a one in seven chance of dying before his or her fifth birthday. 
Lewis said that statistic was probably an underestimate, and expects the figure 
to rise when the next, more comprehensive, study takes place. Maternal health 
figures were equally shocking, with 2,054 deaths per 100,000 live births.

Data compiled by aid workers in 2009 contained a variation of that statistic: 
it was estimated that one out of seven women who become pregnant in south Sudan 
are likely to die due to pregnancy-related causes.

Part of the problem in improving healthcare is logistical. Getting around 
south Sudan is difficult because of the lack of roads, and the heavy rains that 
make large areas inaccessible for several months a year. As a result, just 2.7% 
of babies are fully immunised before their first birthday, one of the world's 
lowest coverage rates. Even now, just a quarter of south Sudan's population has 
access to primary care services. Mass distribution of malaria nets is likely to 
have cut down the number of people affected by the disease, which along with 
pneumonia and diarrhoea are the main killers of children. But Sudan's 
environment is conducive to a host of other health dangers; 12 of the 13 
commonly recognised neglected tropical diseases are found in the south, Dr 
Lewis says.

Factfile: Sudan

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 109

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: No records available

Debt per capita: $803 (£512)

Life expectancy: 57

% children in education (F/M): 46.8/53.3
 