
Over the weekend in a column for the Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/inquirer/adam-goodes-rises-above-the-racism-in-post-afl-career/story-e6frg6z6-1227580479068>
, Patricia Karvelas seized on the comments – some of them abusive and racial – 
that greetedAdam Goodes’s appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/18/adam-goodes-new-job-indigenous-reconciliaton-david-jones>
 as an ambassador for retail giant David Jones. Karvelas often writes about 
Indigenous people and issues and shines a bright light on Indigenous society 
unafraid to expose failings, of others and our own. That’s how it should be.

Adam Goodes reveals his new job: reconciliation adviser at David Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/18/adam-goodes-new-job-indigenous-reconciliaton-david-jones>
Karvelas was blunt in her column: if we don’t deal with racism we can’t deal 
with reconciliation. But she also saw this not as a story about hate and 
bigotry, but one about hope. She pointed to the numbers of people who called 
out this racism. They wrote in support of Adam. They took on those who would 
lead this country down a divided road. These are the voices too often not 
heard. These voices speak to the greatness of Australia and what it could yet 
be. Many prominent Indigenous voices echoed her thoughts.

That we feel so grateful to those who see our common and basic humanity, that 
it takes that for us to be proud to be Australian, tells us only how far we 
still have to go. Just think: how demoralised must a people be that a simple 
act of compassion, some words of kindness can feel like acceptance. Don’t get 
me wrong, I am grateful too. But it feels like saying sorry for your loss after 
a parent or child has died. It is lost in a fog of pain.

It is easy to align with Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes>, he is a wealthy, powerful 
symbol of Indigenous survival. He should make Australians feel good. Like me 
though, I know Adam would be aware that we are the “acceptable faces” of 
Indigenous Australia. We don’t pose hard questions. No one need cross the 
street when they see us coming, not like some of the boys I grew up with. These 
are the people Australia has failed – and continues to fail. Not for lack of 
trying – but the outcomes nonetheless are damning.

These numbers need to be drilled into the minds of all of us: Indigenous 
people are less than a 3% of the total population but a quarter of the number 
of Australians locked up in prisons; Indigenous men and women die roughly a 
decade younger than the rest of the country; the rate of infant mortality is 
twice as high. There are other statistics and they are uniformly bad. In short, 
being black can kill you, make you poor and leave you blind and deaf.

This is the reality of our country. We all own this: bigot or no. In fact, 
those of good will especially own this, because they have failed to change it. 
Words of support and compassion alone don’t fix this. Sending Indigenous 
children to private school alone doesn’t fix this. Adam Goodes winning a 
Brownlow Medal or me winning a TV Logie award alone doesn’t fix this. Would it 
were that simple.

Individual success doesn’t enlighten what troubles us; it often obscures it. 
It can fool us into thinking the problem no longer exists.

Let’s hear words like sovereignty and treaty.

We all seize on hope – hope is energising. And there is hope in the words of 
those supporting Adam Goodes. There is hope in every Indigenous student who 
graduates from school. But we have been here so many times before. So many 
times we have promised to achieve liftoff – the 67 referendum, the freedom 
rides, the tent embassy, Mabo, sorry – and so many times we have stalled.

We are lured into the light only to be mugged by the darkness of our past.

This moment with Adam Goodes is another one of those flashes of hope. Patricia 
Karvelas is right, Australians want to be heard and they do not want to be 
defined by cowards. But there are other words that need to be spoken; words 
beyond football, booing and David Jones. Let’s hear words like sovereignty and 
treaty. Other countries speak these words, more than that, they have made them 
law. Here they are barely uttered.

We need to talk about dispossession – yes, the loss of our land. I sometimes 
sense people are tired of this. But we can’t ignore it. It sits at the heart of 
the malaise. Land is spirit, land is identity, land is power and wealth and 
inheritance. Ask any farming family. Then look to us – we lost it all. Where it 
has been recovered – even there – the road back can be long and progress slow.

Australians who so laudably challenge the bigots among them need also 
challenge themselves. What are they prepared to give up? Land, history, flag, 
anthem, myth or identity – all of it is on the table if we are truly serious. 
Other countries fight wars over these things: we can do it in peace.

Adam Goodes: I needed to go to my country to help heal the wounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/14/adam-goodes-i-needed-to-go-to-my-country-to-help-heal-the-wounds>
As former prime minister Paul Keating reminded us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/21/soft-recognition-alone-will-not-resolve-indigenous-australias-unfinished-business>
 just this past week, we can’t be a great country and not deal with the 
original grievance: dispossession.

But it will not be a battle easily won. We are right to be excited by those 
who denounce racism, but those others who speak words of hate – though smaller 
in number – speak with the power of history. Their words hurt because to 
Indigenous people they are so familiar, sadly more familiar than words of 
kindness.

The story of the good in ordinary Australians needs to be told but we cannot 
leave it there. Indigenous people need more than support; we need more than 
just feeling good. There are hard choices and tough policy decisions to be made 
– for that we look to our leaders. Indigenous people and communities need to be 
empowered – economically and politically – to make those choices, to take those 
decisions.

Australians need to see Indigenous people as more than a charity case; more 
than a welfare problem. Supporting Adam Goodes is easy, and Adam is tough 
enough and successful enough to survive. There are others we don’t see – 
without the privileges of Adam or me – and they need support. They need more 
than words.

We know what is the price of failure: it is death.
 