
This column is not about Jeremy Clarkson. Its subject matter is unlikely to 
prompt 1 million people to sign an online petition nor lead to tanks being 
driven into central London. It is, however, a subject that unites journalists 
from theGuido Fawkes blog’s tank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/20/jeremy-clarkson-petition-guido-fawkes-bbc-top-gear>
 protesters to the BBC and beyond, and it should matter to every single UK 
citizen.

The problem is that the laws involving surveillance of our personal data have 
become so elaborate and so mired in fears of terrorism and other horrifying 
crimes that few people get as upset about them as they do abouta 
minion-thumping TV presenter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/27/top-gear-producer-oisin-tymon-will-not-press-charges-against-jeremy-clarkson>
. And yet a raft of outdated laws now offer unprecedented power in the digital 
age for the state to seize valuable information about us all. That the security 
services are routinely doing this to journalists, whose job should be to hold 
the powerful to account while protecting those who help them to do so, runs 
counter to the individual freedoms that are Magna Carta’s 800-year legacy.

It is easy to see why this subject does not cause mass protest or Twitter 
trends. Most of us feel a sense of powerlessness in an age in which we sort of 
know nothing is private any more, from the content of our emails to the 
pictures we send to friends. And yet few would agree that the security services 
meant to protect us should instead routinely snoop on our communications, not 
necessarily because of any suspected wrongdoing but just because they can.

The fundamental principle that the press should somehow get special treatment, 
be allowed to protect its sources, has itself come up for discussion in the UK. 
In dismissing the legal challenge brought by David Miranda, the partner of 
Glenn Greenwald, who arguedhe had been unlawfully detained under 
counter-terrorism powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/19/high-court-ruling-on-david-miranda-heathrow-detention-live-coverage>
 for nine hours at Heathrow airport, Lord Justice Laws said that rather than 
enjoying what he called “heightened protection” journalists were instead an 
“important sub-class of the law’s more general care for free speech”. So, not 
the bedrock of freedom of expression but an adjunct.

The laws regarding surveillance are also hugely complicated. Even the 
Intelligence and Security Committee report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/12/uk-surveillance-laws-need-total-overhaul-says-landmark-report-edward-snowden>
 published earlier this month found “the current legal framework is difficult 
to understand”. Most provisions are gathered under the Regulation of 
Investigatory Powers Act 2000 but there is also 2014’s Data Retention and 
Investigatory Powers Act, plus intelligence and terrorism acts.

No one is arguing that the security forces shouldn’t have power to intercept 
communications when serious crime is suspected. But in so many cases the crime 
is relatively minor – ministerial rudeness or speeding, for instance – and the 
safeguards meant to check the reasons for interception are valid are no longer 
fit for purpose.

The arguments over “metadata” go to the heart of how outdated the current laws 
are, with the security services routinely arguing that it’s the content of 
emails and phone calls that matters. This argument worked fine when a letter’s 
content needed protection more than its envelope, but the digital envelope now 
allows the security services to find out who is sharing the information, where, 
when and for how long. The content itself is almost immaterial for any 
whistleblower worried about being found consorting with the press.

On Monday in London the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger, will 
discuss surveillance with a former director of GCHQ 
<https://www.city.ac.uk/events/2015/march/journalists,-surveillance-and-the-police-how-can-the-secret-state-learn-to-live-with-the-fourth-estate>
, a former chief constable and the NUJ’s general secretary. The debate is 
chaired by Dominic Ponsford, editor of Press Gazette, which deserves credit for 
a successful campaign focusing on police officers routinely accessing 
journalists’ phone records without judicial oversight. And yet Ponsford admits 
that the new protections the campaign won don’t go far enough. Police requests 
to view data “will still be made in secret, to the telecoms providers, meaning 
news organisations will not have the opportunity to make the case for 
protecting their sources”.

Even a return to the old days – when police officers who raided journalists’ 
offices needed to “blue bag” contentious material until a judge decided their 
concerns warranted inspection – would be a vast improvement.

With an election in May, few politicians will be talking about these concerns 
on the campaign trail. At a time when the relationship between the press and 
the public, let alone the police and state, is at a terrible juncture – 
fractured by revelations over phone hacking and payments for tittle-tattle as 
well as objections to the Snowden revelations – David Cameron knows he is more 
likely to win votes by being a Top Gear fan than by supporting journalists. Yet 
withsix NUJ members launching a legal complaint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/20/police-legal-action-snooping-journalists>
 after finding out personal information about them was being held by the 
authorities as part of their monitoring of “domestic extremism”, the dangers 
are many.

All the main political parties agree that surveillance laws need updating 
post-Snowden but the differences between them are huge. TheConservatives are 
keener on the return of a so-called “snooper’s charter” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/11/david-cameron-snoopers-charter-tory-election-win>
, which, for example, would enable the storage for up to 12 months of the 
communications data that tracks everyone’s web and phone use. On this issue, at 
least, we’re “all in it together”: surveillance affects us all.
 