
Wilderness adventure, Sweden

Surviving the bone-chilling temperatures in the pristine wilderness of 
northern Sweden is no easy feat. This expedition combines snowmobiling, 
cross-country skiing, snowshoeing and dogsledding. The first three days are 
spent in and around a traditional log cabin acclimatising and learning the 
necessary survival skills. The following three days are spent in the wilderness 
living in self-built wooden shelters and snow holes. Then to finish, it's back 
on the cross-country skis to the cabin, where a traditional wood-fired sauna 
and hot tub awaits.
Intrepid Expeditions <http://www.intrepid-expeditions.co.uk/>, 0800 0432509, 
£1,495pp, including international and internal flights and ground transport

Two weeks in the jungle, Guyana

When it comes to deep, dark, jungle, few places can match the Amazonian bush 
of Guyana in South America. For SAS-wannabes, adventure travel company
Bushmasters <http://www.bushmasters.co.uk/> offers a two-week survival 
experience. Week one is training: finding and setting up camp, wildlife 
tracking and bow hunting, locating drinkable water, catching and eating piranha 
and lighting fires without matches, all done under the watch of two local 
Amerindian guides. Week two is the isolation phase. On your own, or in a buddy 
pair, you must do everything yourself. With no more than the clothes you're 
wearing, your machete, bow and arrow, and belt kit, you'll put all your new 
skills to the test. This makes I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here! look 
like a week at Butlins.
Bushmasters <http://www.bushmasters.co.uk/>, £1,500pp, not including flights 

Family breaks, Sussex

Woodlore, the UK's premier school of bushcraft, was founded in 1983 by Mr 
Survival himself: Ray Mears. It offers different experiences, from expeditions 
in Namibia and Canada to wilderness first-aid courses. But closer to home – 
near Ukfield in Sussex – the Family Bushcraft three-day/two-night course offers 
families the chance to get closer to nature. You learn how to build campfires, 
make shelters, track animal and understand the flora and fauna of England's 
forests.
Woodlore, 01580 819668, raymears.com <http://www.raymears.com/>, £225pp

Walking with bushmen, Namibia

Discover the meaning of Safari as you walk with San bushmen in the arid 
sun-lands and ruggedkopjes of Namibia's Erongo mountains, a wild rocky 
landscape of steep escarpments looking out over the vast wilderness of the 
Namib desert. You will learn the art of lightweight desert travel and how to 
move safely and easily through the bush avoiding hyenas and sunburn. Discover 
ways to find water, trap small mammals and birds, as well as tracking and the 
protocols for wildlife encounters. You will also search for ancient rock-art 
sites of the bushmen.
Woodsmoke <>, 01900 821779, £1,895pp, not including flights. Heathrow via 
Johannesburg to Windhoek in Namibia from £1,013 withSouth African Airways <> 
 