
Jilly Cooper's Wicked! is a tale of two schools: one public, one 
comprehensive. "Cooper has tremendous fun with this clash of the classes," wrote
Toby Clementsin the Daily Telegraph, "even if her grasp of youth culture is not 
wholly assured and her description of the Shakespeare Estate, Larkminster's 
'notorious' sink estate, suggests an enviably tangential familiarity with urban 
streets." "The scenes set in the comprehensive never fully convinced me," said
Francis Gilbertin the Times, "too often they unfolded like adult versions of a 
Tom and Jerry cartoon."Melissa Katsoulis in the Sunday Telegraph was equally 
sceptical: "If a real disadvantaged youth got hold of this unlikeable novel, 
he'd weep at its cruel stereotypes, rue the day he learned to read, then set 
about lobbing it through Cooper's front window."

"Reading Joe Boyd's cracking account of the Sixties, you wonder if his life 
since hasn't been one long disappointment," saidMark Ellen in the Observer of 
White Bicycles: Making Music in the 1960s. Boyd worked with Eric Clapton, Pink 
Floyd and Fairport Convention. He also launched the career of Nick Drake and 
helped organise the Newport Folk Festival in 1965, when Bob Dylan went electric 
(a moment Boyd calls "the birth of rock"). "You are left relieved that such a 
central figure wrote this exceptional memoir," added Ellen. "Boyd is just 
grateful to have survived to try to make sense of it all." "Though it ends on a 
sad note, with a list of obits far longer than that of 1960s survivors, this is 
not a glum book," wroteRobert Sandall in the Sunday Times. "It pulses with the 
mad enthusiasms of its period and its author."

"Alan Warner tends to be lumped alongside his compatriot Irvine Welsh as a 
chronicler of 1990s rave culture," observedMelissa McClements in the Financial 
Times, but "The Worms Can Carry Me to Heaven is at once a startling break from 
genre for Warner and a deeper exploration of some of his favoured philosophical 
themes. Now in his forties, it seems the novelist is intent on losing the 
'Highland rave' tag." "The Worms represents an ambitious attempt to distance 
himself from his usual Caledonian territory," agreedHenry Hitchings in the New 
Statesman, "and is his most mature and reflective work to date. Yet, like each 
of his previous novels, it displays above all the pyrotechnic brilliance of his 
imagination." "The prose is far stronger than anything he has written 
previously," saidMatt Thorne in the Independent on Sunday, "and there is 
enormous passion behind the narrative which makes this by far his best book ... 
The Worms is a significant breakthrough for Warner, and a pleasing example of 
how early praise can encourage an author to become more daring rather than 
repeating past successes."
 