
A man suspected of killing five people while they slept in a house in Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> before kidnapping his estranged 
girlfriend and an infant has given himself up to police.

Derrick Dearman, 27, was taken into custody after he walked into the sheriff’s 
office in Greene county, Mississippi, about 20 miles west of the murder scene 
in Citronelle.

Authorities said the dead included a pregnant woman and were found on Saturday 
afternoon inside the home. The woman and the baby abducted from the house were 
later found alive.

The crime was of a magnitude rarely if ever seen in this corner of rural 
Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, said Captain Paul Burch 
of Mobile county sheriff’s department.

“It’s unprecedented here,” Burch told the Associated Press.

Investigators expected to be at the scene for a couple days. “It’s obviously a 
horrific scene,” he said.

Dearman was accompanied by his father when he showed up at the sheriff’s 
department and surrendered on Saturday afternoon, the Alabama sheriff’s office 
said in a statement.

Dearman had confessed to the crimes, Burch told the news site Al.com.

“He’s been cooperative,” Burch told AP.

Dearman will be charged with six counts of capital murder, Mobile county 
sheriff’s spokeswoman Lori Myles said on Sunday. Five counts stem from the 
killing of the adults, and the additional count is because one of the victims, 
22-year-old Chelsea Marie Reed, was five months pregnant, Myles said.

Mobile county district attorney Ashley Rich told reporters near the scene that 
in her 20-year career as a prosecutor she had never encountered a crime “where 
there were five people who were brutally and viciously murdered, and that’s 
what we have here”. Multiple weapons had been used, she said.

The other four killed were identified by sheriff’s officials as Shannon 
Melissa Randall, 35; Justin Kaleb Reed, 23; Joseph Adam Turner, 26; and Robert 
Lee Brown, also 26.


Prosecutors have already begun the process of trying to extradite Dearman from 
Mississippi to Alabama, Burch said.

Though connections between Dearman and the five people killed were not 
immediately clear, investigators have determined that his ex-girlfriend, Laneta 
Lester, had gone to the home on 19 August to get away from an abusive 
relationship with Dearman, the sheriff’s office said in a statement. Lester was 
staying with a relative there.

Around 1am on Saturday, someone inside the house called 911 and reported that 
Dearman was on the property, the statement said. Citronelle police came to the 
house, but Dearman had left before the officers arrived, sheriff’s officials 
said.

Later, sometime between 1:15am and dawn on Saturday, Dearman returned to the 
home and attacked the victims while they were sleeping, the statement said. 
After the killings, Dearman forced Lester and the three-month-old infant — the 
child of the one of the murder victims — into a vehicle. The three drove to the 
home of Dearman’s father in Mississippi.

After they arrived there, Dearman released Lester and the infant and then 
turned himself in, Burch said.

Dearman has some criminal history, including an active warrant for a burglary 
charge, Burch said.

The killings happened about 150 miles southwest of Rutledge, Alabama, another 
town in the southern part of the state where six family members were found shot 
to death at their rural home on 26 August 2002.

In that case, Westley Devon Harris was given a death sentence after being 
convicted of slaughtering his girlfriend’s relatives. Prosecutors said he was 
angry because he thought they were trying to keep him away from her.

After the killings, he fled with his girlfriend and child. The girlfriend, who 
was 16 at the time, ended up testifying against Harris.
 