
The bullet train pulls out of Tokyo station. A huddle of fans wave us off to 
Nagoya with their signed album covers. It's a tradition that they give us 
gifts, usually brightly flavoured sweets and crunchy MSG snacks. One tiny chomp 
and waves of chemical psychosis rush through the veins. Chomp! Chomp! Swallow! 
Save me! I need MORE! I DON'T EVEN LIKE THEM! The sweets stay wrapped. Instead, 
I pick up the beautiful card game that Maiko, an extra-dedicated fan, handed 
me. Toto-Awase, or Sushi Bar, is like pictorial dominoes and is "the best way 
to learn about Japanese food fish culture". The cards have descriptions such as 
"the rosy Isaki flesh is moderately fat with a deep taste" and "in winter Hobo 
has the highest fat content and rich flavoured milk-white flesh".

Bullet trains are different from British trains. The families of the 
high-stressed, high-powered businessmen who jump in front of them have to pay 
¥200,000 for every minute the train is delayed. Apparently. We're travelling at 
a noiseless 200mph as Paul, our drummer, and I order bento boxes. Eating in 
Japan is a bit of an adventure. Even if there are pictures to accompany the 
alien symbols, I'm often clueless. Paul looks nervous - "I'm terrified that I'm 
going to eat something I'll have to spit out." I'm not so bad. The only thing I 
ever spat out here was yellow, snot-like, raw sea anemone. It was involuntary. 
The muscles in my throat did a weird rapid contraction and hacked it back out 
without my permission. It happened quickly and neatly enough for my Japanese 
companions and me to ignore it and continue the stiff, smiling politeness of 
the meal undisturbed.

The black plastic box is in compartments. As far as I can make out, the 
contents are: clams steeped in ginger; unidentifiable fruit or vegetable spicy 
pickle; mushy chicken ball; barrel-shaped root vegetable; black mushroom; an 
omelette tied in a knot; crispy fish skin; chewy crab sausage; not sure, maybe 
fermented entrails; rice; salty plum. I wash the fascinating flavours down with 
Shizuoka green tea. Paul has a bottle of Pocari Sweat - a "healthness" drink.

The train pulls into Nagoya. A huddle of fans wave their unsigned album covers 
and sweets in greeting.

· The writer is the lead singer in Franz Ferdinand
 