
The European court of human rights (ECHR) has ruled that a Turkish politician 
should not have been prosecuted for denying that themass killing of Armenians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide> by Ottoman Turkey in 1915 
was a genocide.

In a landmark free speech ruling, the ECHR judges ruled by 10 votes to seven 
that Doğu Perinçek, chairman of Turkey’s Patriotic party, should never have 
been convicted of racial discrimination by a Swiss court for saying that the 
“Armenian genocide is a great international lie”.

Perinçek was convicted and fined in 2007 after a series of press conferences 
on the topic, which the ECHR ruled was an infringement on his right to free 
speech. In its judgment, the court said Perinçek’s statements related to an 
issue of “public interest and did not amount to a call for hatred or 
intolerance … and could not be regarded as affecting the dignity of the members 
of the Armenian community to the point of requiring a criminal law response”.

The court made a clear distinction with Holocaust denial, whose specific 
history meant it could always be “seen as a form of incitement to racial 
hatred” in certain countries. Its judges have earlier noted that the historical 
facts of the Holocaust, “such as the existence of gas chambers”, were 
“considered clearly established by an international jurisdiction”.

Turkey has always denied that the killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/15/turkey-cannot-accept-armenia-genocide-label-erdogan>
, which started in 1915, were a pre-meditated attempt by the then ruling 
Ottomans to wipe out the Armenians. It says 500,000 died, not 1.5 million as 
claimed by Armenia. Before the mass killings, two million Armenians were living 
in the territory of the Ottoman Empire.

More than 20 nations have so far recognised the killings as genocide, a 
definition supported by numerous historians but vehemently opposed byTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.

In a series of press conferences in Switzerland in 2005, Perinçek repeatedly 
blamed “imperialists from the west and from Tsarist Russia” for stoking 
tensions between Muslims and Armenians in order to undermine the Ottoman 
Empire, and said the resulting deaths were not a premeditated attempt to wipe 
out an ethnic group. The Swiss side argued that denying that a genocide 
occurred was tantamount to “accusing the Armenians of falsifying history, one 
of the worst forms of racial discrimination”.

Geoffrey Robertson, the high-profile British lawyer representing Armenia, said 
the Swiss authorities were wrong to prosecute Perinçek, but only because he was 
“a worthless provocateur”. The ruling contained good news forArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, Robertson said, because it clearly 
stated they have “a right to respect for their history”.

He added: “It clears the way for that to be protected in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> against any real incitement to 
violence, hatred or intolerance.”

The ECHR said it did not have the authority to rule on whether the Armenian 
killings were a genocide or not, which was a job for international criminal 
courts. It also accepted that “the dignity of the victims and the dignity and 
identity of modern-day Armenians were protected by article 8” of the European 
convention on human rights. But it ruled that in the specific circumstances of 
the case, a democratic society should not have gone as far as prosecuting 
Perincek over his comments.

“The context in which they were made had not been marked by heightened 
tensions or special historical overtones in Switzerland,” the ruling said.

“The Swiss courts appeared to have censured Mr Perinçek simply for voicing an 
opinion that diverged from the established ones in Switzerland,” it added.

The ECHR’s grand chamber ruling is final and binding on all council of Europe 
members. Perinçek’s lawyer Laurent Pech hassaid that his client “neither 
contested nor defended the massacres,” but merely denied that the Ottoman 
authorities of the time had a genocidal intention.
 