
Andy Carvin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-carvin> is getting a 
little sick of talking about which verb best describes what he does. "It's 
somewhere between reporting and collaborative network journalism, and George 
Plimpton-like oral history, except that I'm doing it in real time in 140 
characters. I don't know what to call that and I don't care as long as people 
don't waste my time trying to give it a name."

Whatever Carvin's particular brand of news gathering should be called, it has 
made him a must-read source on the Arab uprisings – and possibly the most 
talked about person atSXSW <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw>. "All 
roads now lead to Andy Carvin," declared media critic Jeff Jarvis at a 
discussion on the future of news.

Ever since the start of the Tunisian uprising in December 2010, Carvin has 
been ignoring his day job as a strategist for National Public Radio and serving 
as a one-man broadcast channel-cum-newswire on events in the Middle East. A 
veteran of social media who used Twitter to factcheck the 2008 presidential 
election, hebegan retweeting testimonies, pictures and video from the protests 
in Tunisia - then Egypt and Libya <http://twitter.com/#!/acarvin>.

Although Carvin had a network of blogger contacts in the region whom he used 
to check information being tweeted, what marks him out is his willingness to 
retweet unverified material and ask his followers for help to establish its 
accuracy. "I admit that I don't know the answer to things and see users as 
potential experts and eyewitnesses. In some ways what I'm doing is not that 
different from a broadcast host doing a breaking live story with a producer in 
one ear, talking to pundits and all the while anchoring the coverage, but 
rather than producers I have followers."

Anyone who follows Carvin <http://twitter.com/#!/acarvin> could be forgiven 
for wondering if he ever sleeps. Since December he has regularly sent more than 
100 tweets a day, beginning at around 6.30am and finally logging off at around 
11pm. His family have been endlessly tolerant, he says, but there are ground 
rules: "If we are going out to dinner I put away my phone. I only take it out 
if my wife takes one of the kids to the bathroom."

The ground rules do not preclude broadcasting – or whatever it is – all the 
way through a SXSW debate on the role of social media in the Arab revolts. 
Someone has tweeted him a link to an image of a mortar round with what appeared 
to be a Star of David on it. He has tweeted his followers to ask if any of them 
know what it is. "I said, 'If you were an Israeli arms manufacturer would you 
be stupid enough to put a Star of David on it?'."

One user suggested that the crescent above the star resembled a parachute and 
that the star might be just that, suggesting that it was an illumination round 
rather than evidence of an Israeli conspiracy to prop up Gadaffi. Carvin did a 
quick Google image search and asked his followers to sort through the results. 
Some users pointed out an Indian round with similar markings, others a French 
munition. Even if his team of experts hadn't completely nailed it, yet they had 
done enough to establish that the original characterisation of the picture was 
almost certainly wrong.

During the same session, he broke the news to the room that an Al-Jazeera 
journalist had become the first journalist to be killed covering the uprisings. 
Given his international impact, it comes as a surprise thatCarvin only has 
32,000 followers <http://twitter.com/#!/acarvin> - compared to the million 
Charlie Sheen <http://twitter.com/#!/charliesheen> attracted in 24 hours, for 
instance - but he insists that he is not interested in the machismo of follower 
tallies. "I see my Twitter account as a newsgathering operation and the success 
or failure rate is clearly tied to the expertise of the people who follow me. I 
would rather have almost no one following me and have them all be experts than 
have a million followers."

That expertise was highlighted recently when he tweeted a request for help 
identifying a photograph from Benghazi of "a guy holding up the biggest bullet 
I had ever seen". After some discussion among his followers, US military 
serviceman sent him a link to an image of a Russian anti-aircraft round that 
matched it perfectly. "There is no way that I or anyone else atNPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/npr> could have done that on our own."

Carvin says neither he nor his bosses have yet worked out the broader lessons 
of his success for NPR's newsgathering and organisation. "I don't have a desire 
to blow up the newsroom." But a starting point, he suggests, may be easing the 
conventional workload on his reporter colleagues so they have more time to 
engage with social media.

Doesn't he ever wish he could be on the ground reporting from the tumultuous 
events he is tweeting about? "I do but I don't want to be out there while 
things are rough. I've never been a war correspondent and I don't know how to 
do it." If he hasn't quite worked out what to call what he does, though, he 
winces at the description of his journalism as curation. "I know what I'm doing 
is a form of reporting. I just don't know what kind of reporting it is."
 