
Graham Arnold is a happy man for the first time in 10 weeks, but has warned 
Sydney FC’s task in Asia is far from over. The Sky Blues are on the cusp of 
booking a spot in the last 16 of theAsian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> for the first 
time after beating South Korean side Pohang Steelers 1-0 on Tuesday night to 
stay two points clear at the top of Group H.

A-League set for thrilling final round with identity of premiers still 
anyone's guess | Richard Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/04/thrilling-final-round-awaits-with-identity-of-a-league-premiers-still>
Serbian playmaker Milos Ninkovic’s goal sealed the result at Allianz Stadium 
five minutes into the second half to keep the light shining at the end of the 
tunnel following anA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> 
season to forget. Having endured a taxing period of travel and short 
turnarounds, 11 straight winless matches and exclusion from finals reckoning, 
Arnold was visibly relieved his side’s foray into Asia was reaping rewards.

“I’m very happy for once in 10 weeks,” the Sky Blues coach said. “And I’m 
happy for the players. They’ve worked so hard and done their best every week 
and they haven’t been rewarded – tonight’s a reward for them. It’s also a 
reward for the fans because they’ve stuck by us through thick and thin even 
though they probably don’t understand what we’ve been going through, but 
mentally it’s been tough for everyone.”

Sydney have two group-stage matches remaining, against Urawa Red Diamonds and 
Guangzhou Evergrande. A draw against the Japanese heavyweights at home in two 
weeks will likely see the Sky Blues through, while a win would guarantee them 
top spot before they even travel to China early next month to face reigning 
champions Evergrande who sit last in the group with just two points.

If they top the group Sydney will start the knockout phase against the 
runners-up of Group F – led currently by FC Seoul ahead of second-placed 
Shandong Luneng FC. Arnold was quick to point out the importance of holding 
their nerve.

“We’re not there yet - I want the players to finish on top of the group,” he 
said. “It gives us a better option in Group H. FC Seoul are a very, very good 
side. At the moment Shandong is in second spot, and that would probably suit us 
better.”
 