
Sydney FC have taken a sizeable step towards a maiden Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> quarter-final 
berth after securing a 1-1 draw with Shandong Luneng in China.

Though Brazilian star Diego Tardelli’s equaliser denied the Sky Blues victory 
at Jinan Olympic Sports Centre Stadium on Wednesday night, David Carney banked 
a precious away goal that will bode well for Graham Arnold’s side when they 
host Shandong in next week’s second round-of-16 leg.

Archie Thompson bids farewell to Melbourne as Victory play out tense ACL draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/archie-thompson-bids-farewell-to-melbourne-as-victory-play-out-tense-acl-draw>
Sydney were pushed to the limit in a second half dominated by their opponents, 
but held firm despite Shandong’s 16 shots to their seven. The Mano 
Menezes-coached outfit also had the early possession and nearly gained the 
upper hand in the seventh minute when villain-turned-hero Vedran Janjetovic 
upended Wu Xinghan in the area for a penalty.

But the Sky Blues custodian atoned quickly, avoiding disaster with a diving 
save to deny Argentine playmaker Walter Montillo from the spot.

Sydney settled, and the momentum shifted. Key to the organisation was 
midfielder Milos Dimitrijevic, whose through ball set up his team’s valuable 
goal. The Serbian’s pass from the centre set Riley Woodcock off down to the 
left byline, where the 20-year-old hooked an impressive cross to Carney at the 
back post for a simple but priceless header past Shandong goalkeeper Wang Dalei.

At the break Sydney would have been tipped to continue climbing the scoreboard 
but Shandong, struggling though they are in the Chinese Super League, returned 
in the second half breathing fire.

As the onslaught increased, Rhyan Grant and Matt Jurman ran ragged to hold 
onto Sydney’s lead and it was pure luck when Shandong captain Li Wei hit the 
crossbar with a thundering 30-metre strike that had Janjetovic easily beaten. 
When the ever-dangerous Tardelli stabbed in from close range on 56 minutes it 
had been coming.

Arnold tried for some fresh spark as both sides fatigued, taking off striker 
Matt Simon for Shane Smeltz and replacing David Carney for Andrew Hoole. It 
yielded minimal real chances but Sydney simply refused to surrender.

“It’s good to score, good to get the away goal for the lads,” said Carney, who 
received a yellow card along with Grant. “It’s important we got that.” The 
former Socceroo felt Sydney could have made better decisions in the final third 
but said his team was defensively solid.

“We started the game off slow, but then we came into it in the first half and 
controlled most of the ball,” Carney said. “Second half we knew they were going 
to come at us, [we] rode our luck a bit. But 1-1, we would have taken that 
before the game so we should be proud with that. Hopefully we’ll get a good 
crowd in Sydney now and go on and win it.”
 