
Sydney FC took down Guangzhou Evergrande, edging the cashed-up Chinese 
heavyweights 2-1 to steer theirAsian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> campaign back on 
track.

Huang Bowen cancelled out Robert Stambolziev’s first-half opener at Allianz 
Stadium on Wednesday night, before substitute Milos Dimitrijevic struck a 
dramatic 88th-minute winner.

Melbourne Victory stun Shanghai but Sydney FC fall to Red Diamonds in ACL
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/25/melbourne-victory-stun-shanghai-but-sydney-fc-fall-to-red-diamonds-in-acl>
The question had always been whether Sydney could stack up against Evergrande, 
the reigning ACL champions and one of Asia’s most expensively assembled sides.

Luiz Felipe Scolari’s side were classy but displayed a fitness befitting a 
squad still in Chinese Super League pre-season.

Guangzhou’s $65 million man Jackson Martinez lurked and took a couple of 
stabs, but could not put a goal away against his less-opulent but grittier 
Australian counterparts.

Having warned they wouldn’t be intimidated, Sydney gave as good as they got, 
David Carney and Milos Ninkovic thriving in space not usually afforded to them 
in theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>.

Maybe that was the key, as it was one of the Sky Blues’ best performances this 
season and one that yielded the opening goal.

Off a corner and some superb build-up play, Carney latched onto a through ball 
and headed to Shane Smeltz. The striker flicked his own header back to 
Stambolziev, whose left boot sent a snappy first-time finish past Guangzhou 
gloveman Zeng Cheng.

Sydney barely had minutes to celebrate before the unthinkable happened. Seb 
Ryall yanked Martinez to the turf by his shirt, earning a yellow card and 
conceding a penalty.

Goalkeeper Vedran Janjetovic incredibly saved Ricardo Goulart’s strike from 
the spot, but an equaliser came three minutes later.

On the counter-attack, Huang found space on the right flank and drove in a 
goalward bullet, which Aaron Calver inadvertently buried into the net while 
trying to clear.

From there, the Sky Blues absorbed wave after wave of attack, ACL debutant 
Brandon O’Neill and Matt Jurman doing a particularly diligent job. When their 
defence had no answer, Janjetovic made more crucial saves.

The second half was just as open-ended, and chances came and went for both 
sides. Smeltz and Ninkovic both fired wide and Yu Hanchao botched a simple 
point-blank strike.

Both coaches, Graham Arnold and Scolari, were on fire in the dugout but only 
the former had cause to celebrate when, two minutes from time, Carney flicked a 
shot to Dimitrijevic, who threaded through two defenders and made no mistake.

In the night’s other game involving an A-League side, Melbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> brought a precious 
away point home from Japan, after drawing 1-1 with Gamba Osaka.

Nick Ansell’s pressure at a corner kick gave Victory the lead through an own 
goal inside three minutes.

But Japanese legend Yasuhito Endo found an equaliser shortly before the hour 
mark, with Victory gloveman Danny Vukovic making a string of saves to preserve 
the draw.
 