
Sydney champion and dual Brownlow medallist Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> has announced his AFL 
retirement.


Kangaroos bound into last four as Swans bow out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/kangaroos-bound-into-last-four-as-swans-bow-out>
Goodes told his team-mates of his decision following Sydney’s 26-point 
semi-final loss to North Melbourne at ANZ Stadium.


Goodes, 35, will finish as Sydney’s all-time games leader on 372, making him 
eighth on the competition’s all-time list. He kicked 2.2 and tallied 18 
disposals and 10 marks in his last game.

Swans coach John Longmire confirmed the news after the match in Sydney.

“He got everyone together and he said he’s had enough,” Longmire said. 

“He handled it really well. In everything he does he handles himself so well 
... He’s retired after an absolutely magnificent career. I was a bit emotional, 
he was fine. He’ll take a deep breath now and he needs it.

“Everyone means so much to him, it’ll probably be hard to imagine life without 
the footy club but he’ll be successful in whatever he does.”

Goodes did not speak to the media after the game, nor did he make any obvious 
farewell gestures to the crowd.


“It’s a bit of a shock, he’s a champion of this footy club,” said Swans 
defender Rhyce Shaw, who had previously announced he was retiring at the end of 
the season.


“He’s a champion of the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> and one of 
the greatest people I’ve ever met.”


Asked what Goodes said to his teammates, Shaw said: “He said ‘it’s his time’. 
He’s happy to bow out this way.


“He spoke about how it’s been such a long journey for him, 18 years, coming up 
here and just giving it everything he’s got.


“And 372 games later he’s had enough and he’s contributed so much to the footy 
club and to the AFL. He can go out whichever way he pleases.

“The time’s right for Goodesy, that’s all you can really say. He wanted to 
retire this way and he’s done it and he deserves every accolade he gets.”


Shaw was chaired off the field by his teammates after his 237th and final AFL 
game and would have liked Goodes to have been afforded a similar honour.


“It would have been fantastic for Goodesy to be up there with me, but he 
wanted to do it his own way,” Shaw said.
 