
Graham Arnold will drop the axe on up to six Sydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> players over the next couple of 
days, as the coach pledges a more ruthless recruitment approach to get his club 
back to the top of the A-League.

Fresh from Wednesday night’s heartbreaking Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> exit, Arnold said 
major surgery was needed before next season. He expected “another five or six” 
of his squad would follow already-departed cousins Jacques Faty and Mickael 
Tavares out the door.

Melbourne Victory go out of Asian Champions League with loss to Jeonbuk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/melbourne-victory-go-out-of-asian-champions-league-with-loss-to-jeonbuk>
The Sky Blues’ 2-2 second-leg draw with Shandong Luneng at Allianz Stadium 
ended a successful run in the ACL, a tournament in which they’d flourished 
despite failing to make theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> finals.

The coach will now turn his full attention to rebuilding a team that made the 
grand final only a season ago. “The worst part of my job is telling players 
they’ve got to leave or move on,” Arnold said.

“We’ve had an exceptionally good Champions League, but clear in my mind is the 
A-League. There’ll be changes. I have to look at how to get this club to the 
top. Hard decisions need to be made, and they will be made in the next day or 
so.

“And then recruitment. We’ve already started obviously with [Michael] Zullo 
and [Alex] Wilkinson, but there’s probably another four or five that will come 
in.”

Sydney have already secured the signatures of Melbourne City pair Zullo and 
Wilkinson and are on the hunt for a striker to boost their underwhelming 
attack. Skipper Alex Brosque’s likely move under the salary cap from his 
marquee spot will free up space for a high-profile name in that role.

Arnold also made the surprising admission that he would stop nurturing young 
talent – his signature – in order to make the Sky Blues more competitive.

“I have to be more ruthless,” he said. “I have to forget about developing 
kids. It’s what I love, but I’ve got to forget about it. I’ve got to get the 
best players I can find, and if that means I’m like a lot of the other clubs 
where I don’t have any kids, that’s what I have to do.

“It’s always something I’ve really enjoyed developing, and I watch the 
Socceroos squads and there’s five or six players I helped. But I can’t do that 
anymore. I have to think about what needs to happen to win.”

Arnold felt Sydney’s round-of-16 loss to Shandong was more painful because the 
3-3 aggregate loss was decided on away goals. He questioned the penalty 
conceded by red-carded Zac Anderson, suggesting the player he’d denied a 
goal-scoring opportunity, Yang Xu, had been offside.

But even despite goalkeeper Vedran Janjetovic’s class in saving Diego 
Tardelli’s spot-kick less than 15 minutes from time, Arnold said he never 
allowed himself to believe it was Sydney’s night.

“I’ve been in football long enough to know it’s not over until the final 
whistle,” he said. “I knew they’d keep coming at us and I didn’t have any 
defenders on the bench. With Seb Ryall out we didn’t have any back-up 
defensively.”
 