
They were playing to top their Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> group with a 
match to spare, but Sydney FC couldn’t quite get the job done on Wednesday 
night against Urawa Red Diamonds. Sydney played out a scoreless draw with the 
Japanese giants at a torn-up Allianz Stadium, safe in the knowledge they were 
already through to the knockout stage thanks to Guangzhou Evergrande’s win over 
Pohang Steelers 24 hours earlier.

Roy Hodgson defends Jamie Vardy and says red card for Leicester was ‘unlucky’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/leicester-jamie-vardy-wronged-roy-hodgson>
Graham Arnold’s Group H leaders remain two points clear of the Reds, but 
whether they progress in first place and secure a favourable round-of-16 
match-up will come down to the final fixtures in a fortnight. Sydney’s final 
group match is a tough away trip to China to face Guangzhou Evergrande, 
although the cashed-up defending champions are no chance of advancing. Finish 
top and they’ll likely avoid FC Seoul, and could instead play Chinese outfit 
Shandong Luneng FC.

In a match offering little excitement, goalkeeper Vedran Janjetovic stole the 
show by saving the hosts from conceding late. The Reds fashioned the best 
chance of both teams 10 minutes from time when Yosuke Kashiwagi capitalised on 
a quick break with a brilliant backheel to Shinzo Koroki.

Koroki struck low at point blank, but Janjetovic crouched lower and the 
forward could not make good on his second shot. That was the highlight, but 
Sydney were under pressure from the start. Within the first 10 minutes, 
Tadanari Lee’s well-timed shot sailed just wide, and Janjetovic pounced on a 
Tsukasa Umesaki cross a split second before Slovenian striker Zlatan 
Ljubijankic arrived for tap-in duty.

Tomoaki Makino – who produced the sublime long ball for Umesaki – ran the 
defence but Sydney still managed to concoct their own attacking forays with 
teenage striker George Blackwood making a couple of impressive solo runs and 
Chris Naumoff shaving the near post just before the break. They just couldn’t 
find a large enough opening, and Arnold finally introduced benched playmaker 
Milos Ninkovic for added spark.

Both Sydney’s camp and the 8,803 crowd appealed for a late penalty when 
Blackwood appeared to be hauled down in the box, but their screams went 
unanswered. Both coaches bemoaned the poor state of the pitch, which was ripped 
to shreds after the NSW Waratahs and Sydney Roosters both played home games in 
wet conditions over the last few days.

Arnold revealed Ninkovic felt too apprehensive to start on such a bad surface 
after copping a knock on his knee during training two days ago. “When we saw 
the pitch he was a little bit vulnerable about starting the game,” Arnold said. 
“We only made the decision just before we did the team sheet to start Naumoff 
ahead of him because he wasn’t confident.

“It was tough for both teams on a field like that, it wasn’t an easy surface 
to play on. “But overall we did very well – they’re a very difficult team to 
play against.”

Mihailo Petrovic was happy to take a point and keep his side in contention to 
finish top of the group. “Obviously if the pitch conditions were better, we 
could have played a better game,” Petrovic said. “Also, we played on Saturday 
night and only had four days’ rest whileSydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> had 10 days’ rest. Considering 
this, we fought very hard.”



 