
"I was reading The Outsider one lunch whilst on a work placement at a steel 
stockholders in Sheffield. One of the salesmen asked me, "What do you read 
books for?" I was so taken aback, the best I could come up with was enjoyment."

That's a comment <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/28621429>
 from last week's Reading group discussion by a contributor called Pazza. 
"Enjoyment" is a funny response, of course, because there is so much more to 
The Outsider. You don't need to be told about its impact on European thought 
and just how many books and article have been written about it as a work of 
philosophy. That doesn't mean to say, however, that Pazza's answer isn't 
actually a good one. As I read through The Outsider this time around the thing 
that struck me was the simple pleasure of reading it. It might be seen as a 
landmark in philosophy, but it's also a damn good novel.

There's a famous Camus quote that "saying things badly increases the 
unhappiness of the world". I set that down both as an insight into his attitude 
to writing and as a good reason for me to avoid going into a practical 
criticism-style essay into his prose. My French isn't up to it, and it's no 
particular insight to point our that his writing is vivid, and elegant. It may 
be plain, but only in the way of a well-turned piece of wood, where the surface 
is smooth, yet also reveals all the undulations of the grain.

Anyway, anyone who has slogged through Sartre's Nausea will appreciate Camus' 
qualities as a storyteller. My own battle with Camus' frenemy's famous book 
took place quite a few years ago, and I came out the loser. So I should preface 
this remark by admitting I may be doing Sartre an injustice – but from what I 
can remember, another big difference between Nausea and The Outsider is a 
refusal to preach. His book is more complete as a novel. Mersault's story isn't 
a simply framework for a philosophy, it is something in and of itself. It is 
full of novelistic possibility. It is rich in ambiguity. It is ripe for 
interpretation. It is full of doubt. This is no screed setting out the rules of 
existentialism, or evenabsurdism <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Absurdism>. 
Camus doesn't claim to know all the answers, or even all the questions, but he 
does have the novelist's ability to make you wonder what those questions might 
be, and to reveal all the complex mess of human psychology.

Take the trial. One possible interpretation is that Mersault is killed because 
he failed to do what society expected of him at the time of his mother's 
funeral. On this interpretation Mersault is largely a victim of circumstances; 
of the bad fortune of walking back onto that part of the beach when he did; of 
the hot sun; of the irrational mores of the people who oversee his trial. His 
head is going to be removed from his body not so much because of the crime he 
committed, but because he refuses to bow to convention, and refuses to be 
dishonest. Mersault is a kind of martyr – which may explain why Camus once 
described him as "the only Christ that we deserve".

I don't think there's anything wrong with that interpretation – it is probably 
the most obvious, and possibly the most likely. But it isn't the only one. That 
Christ quote may also point the way to something bleaker. If Mersault is the 
only Christ we deserve, what does that make us? Especially in light of the 
following passage, the crucial moment at the end of the first part of the book:

Then I fired four more times into the lifeless body, where the bullets sank 
without leaving a trace. And it was as if I had rapped sharply, four times, on 
the fatal door of destiny.

"Fatal door of destiny" is Sandra Smith's smart translation of "la porte du 
malheur". The "door of misfortune" would be the weaker literal rendition, I 
suppose. It suggests – possibly – that it it was these four shots that sealed 
Mersault's fate. It might even suggest that Mersault knows as much, even if he 
presents things differently later on in his account of the trial. In spite of 
Mersault's protestations, might the prosecution's focus on his mother be 
irrelevant to the outcome? We never hear the jury's deliberations, and there's 
no summary from the judge. We, like Mersault, only hear the verdict.

Maybe that's an extreme reading. But it's there. Camus allows for ambiguity. 
Like plenty of the best novelists, he refuses to make up our mind for us. He is 
not afraid of contradictions. It is a book where more than one thing can be 
true at once, more than one thing can be false, where some things can be both 
true and false and where nearly all are uncertain.

To go back to those four shots. They also demonstrate another aspect of Camus' 
talent. Just as they may change everything that comes afterwards, they also 
call into question a great deal of what has gone before. They made me wonder, 
for instance, if I had got Mersault all wrong.

He is flawed from the off. We can question, for instance, whether he should 
have helped Raymond write the letter that enabled him to beat his girlfriend. 
We might even, like the French state, feel that he is heartless towards his 
mother. We certainly don't have to endorse all his actions. Nevertheless, 
there's still something essentially amiable about him. Mersault is a man who 
delights in swimming in the sea, who describes his simple meals with relish, 
who makes us laugh about his neighbour Salamano and his mangy dog and who also 
makes us pity Salamano when the dog disappears. He is a man who says the 
following:

"The street lamps made the damp pavements glisten and every few minutes the 
headlights of the trams lit up someone's hair, a smile or a silver bracelet. A 
little while later, as the trams passed by less often, the night grew even 
darker above the trees and lights, and the streets below began to empty little 
by little, until the first cat slowly crossed the road, deserted once more."

I could have picked dozens of similar passages. They also would have been 
fairly simple, and even apparently inconsequential. But they too would have 
shown a similar fascination with the stuff of life, and a similar enjoyment of 
just being. This idea was neatly summed up in Phil Baines' notes onour recent 
Camus slideshow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2013/nov/07/albert-camus-the-outsider-gallery>
, with Cyril Connolly's suggestion that The Outsider is not a work of gloomy 
existentialism – but a "violent affirmation of health and sanity" whose hero 
"is sensual and well-meaning, profoundly in love with life".

And just as he loves life, we respond to him. Which makes his crime all the 
more shocking. You can understand that Mersault might have felt threatened by 
the man on the beach. That he might have been confused by the sun. That firing 
might have been an unlucky instinct. But to follow up with four more bullets? 
What was he thinking? How are we supposed to read this? We might see it as a 
continuation of his indifference to fate. Assuming we accept that he is 
indifferent at all. Or we might see it as something more primal, more animal, 
more horrifying.

After maligning Sartre, I should acknowledge that he put this aspect of Camus 
brilliantly: "He is a classical Mediterranean. I would call his pessimism 
'solar' if you remember how much black there is in the sun."

It's this feeling for darkness that distinguishes him as a novelist more than 
a philosopher. Camus is the heir to Conrad and to Dostoevsky, just as much as 
Heidegger.
 