
Syria's uprising has entered uncharted territory after rebels fighting the 
regime ofBashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> 
killed three of his top security chiefs in a devastating bomb attack in the 
heart of Damascus on Wednesday – the single worst loss for the government in 16 
months of increasingly bloody struggle.

Mass defections of soldiers and a rampage by pro-regime militiamen were 
reported in the capital amid a swirl of rumours, including one that Assad's 
wife, Asma, had fled to Russia and another that troops were being issued with 
gas masks, raising fears of the use of chemical weapons.

The president's whereabouts was also unclear, with one unconfirmed report that 
he had been wounded and left Damascus for Latakia on the coast.

The White House spokesman Jay Carney said it was "clear that Assad is losing 
control".

He told reporters: "All of our partners internationally need to come together 
to support a transition."

The UN security council is due to vote on western-backed resolution at 2pm BST 
on Thursday that threatens sanctions against the Assad government if it fails 
to withdraw troops and heavy weapons from populated areas.

The resolution is being tabled under chapter seven of the UN Charter, which 
could ultimately authorise force. Russia has said it will veto any chapter 
seven resolution. The US and Russian UN ambassadors met on Wednesday without 
reaching agreement.

David Cameron, meeting British troops in Afghanistan, said it was time for 
Assad to go and called on China and Russia to support the resolution.

Reports from Damascus on Wednesday described loud explosions, gunfire in the 
streets, attack helicopters firing and clouds of smoke over residential areas.

Earlier, Syrian state TV confirmed the deaths of Assef Shawkat, Assad's 
brother-in-law and closest security adviser and the deputy head of the armed 
forces, as well as Dawoud Rajha, the minister of defence and the regime's most 
senior Christian figure. Hassan Turkmani, his crisis management chief, was also 
killed.

Other leading figures, including the interior minister, Mohammad Shaar, and 
the intelligence chief, Hisham Bekhtyar, were wounded and being treated in the 
capital's al-Shami hospital. Uncertainty about the precise circumstances of the 
attack immediately gave rise to feverish speculation about possible internecine 
killings which the regime could blame on its enemies.

Explosions were also reported from the headquarters of the army's 4th Division 
in Damascus – the regime's elite unit commanded by Assad's brother Maher.

Sergei Lavrov, Russia's foreign minister, said a "decisive battle" had begun in
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. Lavrov also made it clear that 
Moscow would oppose a draft UN security council resolution threatening 
punishment if Assad did not implement the UN-backed peace plan promoted by Kofi 
Annan.

In Syria, the Local Co-ordination Committees, an activist network, said 102 
people had been killed in fighting across the country.

The morning attack on the headquarters of Syria's national security council in 
the al-Rawda area was the most audacious yet by anti-Assad rebels, who have 
been involved in sporadic fighting in parts of the capital for the past four 
days. Syrian television said it was a suicide attack, and it was rumoured that 
the suspected killer may have been a bodyguard for Rajha or another member of 
Assad's inner circle. One pro-regime source in Damascus told the Guardian it 
was possible a bomb could have been planted on the premises.

The attack certainly appeared to be a deadly blow to the heart of the regime 
after two recent high-level defections – by a senior Republican Guard commander 
and Syria's ambassador to Iraq.

Syrian state television said foreign-backed "terrorists" had carried out the 
attack. The country's armed forces said in a statement that Syria was 
"determined to confront all forms of terrorism and chop off any hand that harms 
national security".

"The opposition has hit the jackpot," said Nadim Shehadi, a Middle East 
analyst at Chatham House in London. "The consequences are too big to digest. It 
may provoke more violence by the regime. Everyone is revising their 
calculations.

"People will be deciding whether to defect or not and the Russians will be 
wondering if they have backed the wrong horse," he said.

The Free Syrian Army (FSA), the main armed opposition group, laid claim to the 
attack. "God willing, this is the beginning of the end of the regime," its 
commander, Riad al-Asaad, told Associated Press in a telephone interview from 
Turkey. "Hopefully, Bashar will be next." An Islamist group called Liwa 
al-Islam also claimed responsibility.

Syrian state television, which was uncharacteristically quick to report the 
news, also said the military would call up its reserve forces on Thursday 
morning. Replacements for the three dead men were quickly announced.

General Fahd Jassem al-Freij, Rajha's replacement, denied reports on Arab 
satellite television channels about military defections in Idlib and Damascus 
and explosions at 4th Division headquarters.

Rumours spread wildly in the hours after the bombing, though much information 
was impossible to verify. According to one pro-government source, FSA rebels 
began moving around in pick-up trucks to demonstrate that they controlled parts 
of the city. Ba'ath party members had been executed by FSA men, the source said.

Damascus residents contacted by the Guardian said there had been no audible 
blast or visible damage at the site. Other Syrian sources suggested – without 
offering any evidence – that the three security chiefs might have been killed 
by the regime to forestall a possible coup or remove potential replacements for 
Assad.

"Either the generals were preparing a coup or if not there must be an 
intelligence operation here," said one Syrian analyst.

There were also widespread reports of defections in central Damascus as well 
as in the cities of Homs and Hama. Activists reported that several tanks had 
been abandoned near the centre of the capital and that several combat units had 
defected en masse. These reports could not be confirmed.

One activist, Omar al-Dimashki, said large numbers of troops and plainclothes 
police were deployed in the streets after the bombing, with snipers taking up 
positions on high buildings.

Shawkat, married to Assad's sister Bushra, was one of the most feared figures 
in the president's inner circle and had won the support of the clan's 
influential matriarch, Anisa. He was one of three central figures in the regime 
crackdown, along with Assad himself and Assad's brother Maher. As Syria's 
overall security chief, he had key input into all military and intelligence 
operations. He is known to have survived an attempt to poison him in late May 
when a cook contaminated food that had been prepared for him and key members of 
the national security ministry.

Abu Hamza, of the FSA, told the Guardian at the time that rebel forces were 
trying to recruit aides of regime figures to carry out future attacks. "We have 
had some success with this," he said. "Some have been with us for a long time 
and have not yet been given orders to move."

Shawkat had also been a key point-man with Iran and with Hezbollah. Since the 
uprising started he had chaired key strategy meetings and had driven the 
regime's uncompromising and aggressive military response to the escalating 
dissent.

Rajha, a former general and an Orthodox Christian, was appointed defence 
minister last year in an apparent attempt by the Alawite-dominated regime to 
appoint a minority figure to a key job.

Prospects for any kind of negotiations between the government and rebels, 
always slim, have now all but disappeared.

Pro-regime Syrians appeared deeply shocked. "A lot of pro-Assad people are 
really panicking," said an opposition activist. "Now they sound really nervous."

Assad supporters admitted the attack was a serious blow. "This will not be the 
end of the regime in any way," said a member of Assad's Alawite community. "But 
it is serious and people are traumatised at the fact that the opposition 
managed to assassinate these people. But government supporters want the 
government to be firm and show it is still in control. The Syrian government is 
not usually impulsive."
 