
Middle Eastern rulers are well acquainted with the arts of cosmetic reform. 
But Syria's electoral charade is only likely to anger the opposition. On 
Tuesday, the UN peace envoy to Syria,Kofi Annan, gave a sobering press 
conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middle-east-live/2012/may/09/syria-libya-bahrain-live?INTCMP=SRCH#block-11>
 saying that torture in Syria was worsening, that the government still appeared 
to be using heavy weapons, and that there is a high risk of civil war. His 
spokesman added that there are credible reports that Syrians who speak to the 
UN observers – who number just 60 – are at risk of being arrested or even 
killed.

The same day, the head of the Red Cross said 1.5 million Syrians were in need 
of humanitarian aid; and opposition activists at the London-based Syrian 
Observatory for Human Rights said more than 800 people, mostly civilians, have 
been killed since the internationally brokered "ceasefire" began on 25 April. 
The Turkish prime minister, Recip Erdogan, said there had been 10,000 deaths, 
25,000 refugees in Turkey and 100,000 in Jordan, and that President Bashar 
al-Assad's regime is "finished".

Meanwhile, in Damascus, officials enthused about the country's parliamentary 
election, held on Monday. The ever-friendly Tehran Times described the 
"environment of democracy" and quoted the interior minister saying there were 
"no problems, except some minor things that usually occur in elections". The 
Syrian government will be hoping that the election will help it to regain 
legitimacy and marginalise an opposition it continues to brand as terrorists 
and thugs. It follows a February referendum on constitutional amendments that – 
in theory – ended the one-party rule of the Syrian Ba'ath, and limited any 
holder of the presidency to a maximum of two seven-year terms (Assad has been 
in office for 12 years). The government also formally lifted the emergency law 
that had been in place inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> for 
decades. But in the context of the uprising and the subsequent state-led 
violence, it's clear these "reforms" are too little, too late.

These changes might have seemed impressive if they had taken place 18 months 
ago. The official ending of the Ba'ath party's monopoly on power is a 
precondition to democratisation. However, it is unlikely to be implemented in 
any meaningful way. A comparison can be drawn with Hosni Mubarak's 
constitutional reforms in 2006, which permitted more than one candidate to run 
for the presidency – but in practice led to no real contest.

The Arab world has long had a deficit of democracy, but has had no shortage of 
elections. Since the end of the second world war, as democracy and 
self-determination have emerged as international norms, it has become de 
rigueur for every authoritarian state to claim it has its own form of 
democracy. Almost all the authoritarian rulers of the Arab world have set up 
weak parliaments that are under varying degrees of control. Only Saudi Arabia, 
the UAE and Qatar openly lack parliamentary elections, and Qatar has promised 
to introduce them next year.

Regimes have become experts in manipulating the appearance of reform. This has 
sometimes placated western critics (for whom democracy is never the number one 
factor in foreign policymaking, but is nonetheless a consideration in terms of 
domestic public opinion). But focusing on legalistic reforms is misleading in 
political contexts dominated by the executive branch, where the rule of law is 
usually selective and politicised.

In several cases, the weakness of parliaments, which were intended to contain 
dissent within a manageable framework, has simply encouraged people to take to 
the streets instead. In Egypt, one of the triggers for the January 2011 
uprising was the perception that the 2010 election was more crudely and 
blatantly rigged than the previous one. Before the election, the Muslim 
Brotherhood leadership had argued that participation in the existing system, 
albeit flawed, was more productive than the boycott followed by liberal 
candidate Mohammed El Baradei and others. Then the official results suggested 
an implausible surge in support for the increasingly unpopular ruling party, 
supposedly up from 73% to 86.4%. Observers described "breathtaking" fraud and a 
Brotherhood leader said the regime was destroying people's hopes for peaceful 
change.

In Bahrain last year, byelections were boycotted by the opposition because 
they were held amid an atmosphere of intimidation, with hundreds jailed for 
crimes relating to free expression and with a number of restive Shia villages 
kept under security lockdown. Yet the government was able to use the polls to 
reassure its supporters; the local media used some rather creative accounting 
to suggest turnout was over 50%, whereas the full results showed it was 17%. 
Syria, which is experiencing far worse violence and repression, uses a 
comparable discourse, telling government supporters that the opposition, which 
has boycotted the polls, are simply foreign-instigated trouble-makers who want 
to sabotage "comprehensive reforms".

Many people would prefer peaceful, evolutionary reforms rather than risking 
instability and violence. But the Arab revolutions have come about partly 
because of the failure of regimes to build credible processes of evolutionary 
reform. Other rulers should learn from Syria that postponing reform will only 
increase its eventual costs.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://twitter.com/#!/commentisfree>
 