
Literacy among the adult population needs dicussing, and the National 
Institute of Adult Continuing Education (NIACE) is pleased thatThe Guardian is 
highlighting the issue 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/sep/21/adult-illiteracy-westfield>.

A recent NIACE inquiry into adult literacy found that those with the poorest 
literacy skills have been helped least over the past 10 years, and that we need 
a range of ways to help them improve their skills.

But it is important not to reduce a complex issue to a simple problem that can 
be easily fixed. People with poor literacy need to be taught by qualified and 
experienced teachers. Of course they can be supported by union learning reps 
and other champions. They can be helped by peers, friends and families.

But it is highly unlikely that someone who is illiterate will learn to read by 
using a paperback book for a couple of hours a week, one-on-one, in six months 
or less. Would you want your children taught in that way?

Tackling literacy is not simple. It needs ongoing investment, creativity and 
commitment. There is

still a huge amount of work to do in schools, in post-16 education, and with 
adults, many of whom are in the workplace.

Westfield is to be applauded 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/standard-olympics/article-23983067-bosses-shocked-by-hundreds-of-games-staff-who-cannot-read-or-write.do>
, along with many other employers, for the steps they have taken. As should the 
publishing industry for the pioneering work it has done through the quick reads 
initiative.

There is a big role here for parents and carers too, as research shows that a 
child's achievement is influenced more by parental involvement in learning than 
any other factor.

Adults are very rarely illiterate, but at least one-in-five need help to 
develop their confidence in reading, writing and speaking.

This requires a range of approaches – not least to attract those who hated 
school and dread the thought of going back to learning.

We need to work together to offer a range of the right opportunities for 
adults to gain the confidence they need to succeed and to encourage their 
children to do the same.

We owe it to those we have, collectively as a society, let down so badly to 
give them the best learning experience we possibly can.

• Carol Taylor is Director for Development and Research at NIACE
 