
A sweeping stocktake of Australia’s social policy and how it meets national 
need suggests future Labor governments will consider increasing unemployment 
benefits and help for the long-term unemployed, spend more on education, 
simplify family payments, revamp labour market programs and protect employees’ 
rights and conditions despite drastic changes in the workplace.

Bill Shorten commits Labor to full employment goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/15/bill-shorten-commits-labor-to-full-employment-goal>
The review, the result of two years of consultations by Labor’s shadow 
minister for families and payments, Jenny Macklin, paints a picture of rising 
inequality and social policies that have not kept up with changes in the 
economy, the labour market or the life choices of Australian families.

To be launched by Macklin and the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, on Wednesday 
night, it says rising inequality is not just a threat to Australian society, 
but also to economic growth.

“Inequality is dragging Australia down,” Macklin argues, saying Labor’s model 
of “inclusive growth” is in line with a new international policy consensus.

“After a quarter-century of continuous economic growth, inequality is at a 
75-year high.

“2.5 million Australians live below the poverty line, and hundreds of 
thousands of Australians are unemployed,” the review states, citing statistics 
including that the average wealth of a household in the top 20% wealth group is 
now about 70 times the average wealth of a household in the bottom 20%,” the 
report says.

Macklin emphasises the report is neither an election manifesto nor a detailed 
policy document.

She says its aim is to use Labor’s years in opposition “to take a more studied 
look at social policy in Australia. To consider what’s working, what isn’t, and 
how Australians are faring, so that we would be ready to govern again, with a 
clear agenda”.

It describes an increasing pattern of underemployment where casual or contract 
workers struggle to earn enough to survive, on top of entrenched unemployment 
in particular groups – including young people trying to get into the workforce 
– leading to disadvantage concentrated in the same geographical areas that have 
recorded high long-term unemployment for many years.

“On average, it takes young people 4.7 years from leaving full-time education 
to entering full-time work. This is significantly higher than the one year it 
took in 1986. Only 65% of university graduates, and 58% of Certificate II or 
higher graduates are in full-time work four months after graduating,” the 
report entitled Growing Together says.

“In 2008, at the height of the global economic downturn, the unemployment rate 
in Australia reached 5.9%. At that point, about 655,000 Australians were 
unemployed. Today, our unemployment rate is at 6% and more than 750,000 
Australians who want a job can’t get one.

“As of November 2015, labour force under-utilisation (the unemployed plus the 
underemployed) was 14.3%. This is the real picture of unemployment in 
Australia.”

Australia can have good jobs without sacrificing employment growth | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/feb/11/australia-can-have-good-jobs-without-sacrificing-employment-growth>
And it says this existing unemployment and underemployment comes as 
Australia’s faces “a serious new jobs challenge” due to dual pressures – the 
cyclical pressure of the transition out of the largest investment boom in 
Australia’s history and the structural pressure from new technologies and from 
climate change.

“Increasingly, underemployment, insecure work and low wages growth is making 
it harder for families to build stable lives. Inequality is rising – 
undermining living standards, sustainable growth and social cohesion,” the 
report concludes.

“All this is happening at a time when economic growth has slowed, household 
incomes are under pressure and balancing the budget is more challenging. 
Perhaps for the first time in our history, we cannot be confident that the next 
generation of Australians will be better off than we are.”

Macklin says the “gap between the very wealthy and everyone else is getting 
wider. Living standards for the middle and working classes are falling” and 
Australian should be doing better than that.

The document does set out areas where a Labor government might act.

These include:

 * Concentrating on preschool and early years education in line with research 
showing this is by far the best way to overcome disadvantage, to the benefit of 
the individual and economic productivity. 
 * Conducting a review of the adequacy of Newstart (unemployment benefit) 
payments, including for single parents, which both welfare and business groups 
argue are too low. 
 * Developing new policies to get long-term unemployed people back into the 
workforce, citing criticisms of current labour market programs. 
 * Reworking family payments in line with the recommendations of the Henry 
review, which recommended a simpler system of payments to ensure children had a 
basic acceptable living standard. Labor rejects the Coalition’s proposed 
changes and insists payments to single parents and grandparent carers must be 
protected. 
 * A new minister for ageing and longevity. 
 * A commitment to full employment and to protecting workers’ rights as the 
labour market changes, for example in the sharing economy. 
The document also proposes much tougher scrutiny on social policy in the 
future, to make sure spending does not again get out of kilter with needs.

“This is a national debate we need to have. Put bluntly, too much money goes 
to programs without a solid evidence base, and too little towards establishing 
what works,” it says.

“A future Labor government should investigate the establishment of a body to 
apply the same rigour to social policy as is applied to other areas of policy 
... to inform change and reduce waste,” it says.

According to Kasy Chambers, chief executive of Anglicare Australia, the 
commitment to an oversight body is important.

“That means Labor is committing to continue thinking about policy in this deep 
and thorough way, which is crucial given the amount of money spent in these 
area, and should avoid knee-jerk policy reactions to a particular event or 
situation,” she said.

Paul Smyth, professor at University of Melbourne’s school of political 
science, who was consulted in the preparation of the report, said the report 
paved the way for Labor to build policy in line with “the new model that puts 
social policy at the centre of economic policy rather than marginalised on the 
sidelines”.
 