
Afghan officials say Pakistan has released a new batch of Taliban prisoners, 
in the latest of a series of concessions to Kabul that could signal greater 
Pakistani support for a peace deal inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

According to sources in Kabul, Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> released nine middle-ranking 
Taliban commanders, making a total of 18 such prisoners let out of Pakistani 
jails since last month. Afghan and western officials said most of the Taliban 
prisoners had been arrested because they had shown interest in making peace, 
without the permission of the Pakistani military, which has long seen its 
backing for the insurgents as a strategic bargaining chip.

The prisoner releases come amid a flurry of bilateral meetings and a 
significant warming in the Afghan-Pakistan relationship, which is almost 
universally seen as critical to hopes of peaceful settlement in the 11-year 
Afghan conflict.

Afghanistan's President Hamid Karzai and his Pakistani counterpart, Asif Ali 
Zardari, met in Ankara on Wednesday. The outcome of the meeting has not been 
revealed other than an agreement to conduct a joint investigation into an
assassination attempt last week against Asadullah Khalid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/07/afghanistan-suicide-bomber-genitals>
, the head of Afghan intelligence.

A hotline has also been established between the leaders of Afghanistan, 
Pakistan andTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>. The Ankara 
summit followed a meeting of security officials in London on 5 December, and a 
visit to Pakistan by Afghanistan's high peace council last month.

The head of the council's executive, Masoom Stanekzai, said: "You can see two 
things. One is there is a change of language. Second is they are taking some 
practical steps."

He added that the prisoner releases "sent a positive message in terms of 
building confidence both among the public and with the Taliban".

Another Afghan official, speaking off the record, said: "If Pakistan 
co-operates, there could be a major breakthrough in 2013, and that means a 
sustained period of face-to-face negotiations, and a ceasefire leading toTaliban
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> participation in the [2014] 
election."

However, there is still significant scepticism about Pakistan's motives in 
Kabul and western capitals, which for years have accused it of stoking the 
insurgency while paying lip service to peace. "We don't yet know if this is a 
tactical or strategic shift," an Afghan official said.

Pakistan has still not released its most senior Taliban prisoners, most 
importantly the former second in command, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who Kabul 
believes could be a key participant in any future peace talks. The Pakistani 
foreign minister, Hina Rabbani Khar, said on Wednesday that it was still too 
early to discuss Baradar's release but that Pakistan would continue to release 
Taliban inmates.

Afghan officials would also prefer to have had a chance to talk to the Taliban 
prisoners on their release, but they were instead allowed to disperse. Most are 
thought to have gone back to their families in Pakistan, though one mid-level 
official is said to have gone to Saudi Arabia, where he has family, and there 
were unconfirmed reports that at least one had returned to the fight in 
Afghanistan and another had been re-arrested.

"The litmus test is the insurgency and that has continued unabated," said one 
doubtful western expert on the Taliban. "There is no sign that they have reined 
in these guys because they still think they are their best asset to get the 
government in Kabul that they want."

Optimists inside the Karzai government insist that such views do not take into 
account the dramatically different atmosphere in the most recent talks. They 
believe there that is now substantial evidence that Pakistan is taking a new 
view of its long-term interests and preparing for the possibility of the 
success of an Afghan settlement rather than its failure. They say the Pakistani 
leadership appears less preoccupied by the longstanding fear that Afghanistan 
could become an Indian client state that would contribute to Pakistan's 
encirclement.

"That is a real change. They didn't even mention India," said a participant in 
recent talks. "They didn't ask for India to close its consulates. They didn't 
talk about their need for a 'friendly' Afghanistan. They said they needed a 
stable Afghanistan."

He said Pakistan had made further concessions, agreeing to guarantee safe 
passage to a Taliban delegation to forthcoming informal talks in Chantilly, 
outside Paris. The Afghan and Pakistani leadership have also discussed 
deepening military co-ordination. Stanekzai said that there was agreement to 
organise a joint meeting of Afghan and Pakistani Islamic clerics early in the 
new year, focused on "how to change the narrative of violence to a narrative of 
peace".

Stanekzai would not comment on reports that Afghan officials had visited 
Baradar in jail in Pakistan, but US officials said that at least one such 
meeting took place. It is also believed that senior Taliban inmates in Pakistan 
have been placed under a more liberal regime, such as being allowed to make 
telephone calls under supervision.

In light of Pakistan's more positive approach, Stanekzai said, Kabul was 
determined that last week's assassination attempt against its national security 
director would not derail the improvement in the bilateral relationship, 
although Afghanistan had evidence that the would-be killer – who hid explosives 
in his underpants – came from Quetta in Pakistan.

"No doubt there are enemies of the peace [process] everywhere and they don't 
want this reconciliation to move forward, people who benefit from the 
continuation of conflict and war," he said. "They will always create obstacles 
in order to prevent it, and every time we make some progress there is an 
incident that happens"

He also called on the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> to release Taliban 
commanders from Guantánamo Bay, so they could take part in a peace process that 
began and then stalled in Qatar earlier this year. The release of five Taliban 
inmates has been delayed because of a lack of agreement between the US and the 
insurgent leadership on guarantees that they would not re-enter the conflict.

"We do hope that issue is resolved quickly, as this can be a step forward," 
Stanekzai said, adding that in return, the Taliban would have to commit to 
direct peace talks and a ceasefire. He said: "In negotiation and peace talks, 
you have to give something and you have to get something."
 