
Today’s best bets

Pontefract remembers one of its most popular performers this evening with the 
Mr Wolf Handicap, named after a horse who raced at the track no less than 36 
times, coming home in front on eight occasions. His race is a high-quality 
sprint handicap, too, though it seems a little odd that it is restricted to 
three-year-olds, since Mr Wolf himself did not discover his liking for Ponte 
until 25 races into his career, when he was already four.

Mr Wolf’s place in the heart of Pontefract racegoers was assured when he won 
his first three races at the track in the space of 19 days in the summer of 
2005 and, while there are unlikely to be similar heroics from any of today’s 
runners,Aleef (7.45) appeals as the sort to show plenty of progress over the 
next few months. Charlie Hills’s colt finished last of eight on his only run as 
a juvenile but returned to action in May with a victory at Lingfield in a 
useful time and may have the class to overcome a wide draw.

Deluxe (3.15) is still a maiden after 18 starts but produced one of the best 
runs of his career on his first start at Brighton last time out. He is up just 
a pound in the ratings and still feasibly weighted on a mark of 61 for today’s 
return there. SoaringSpirits (2.45), who has also run well at Brighton in the 
past, should go close on the same card, whileEastern Dragon (4.00) and Vallarta 
(4.30) are fairly priced to win at Ayr. At Windsor this evening, Wiley Post 
(9.00) could be worth waiting for in the last. 

Tipping competition – a new week

Congratulations to Steve Ellis, who won last week’s competition on a final 
score of +25, despite a winnerless Friday, with jackboyle1892 finishing 
strongly. Steve’s prize was a bet in the Derby; he went for Massaat each-way, 
which at least will have given him a thrill for the first mile or so, as that 
one raced prominently.

To clarify on a point that was disputed last week, there is nothing in our 
rules to prevent an entrant from changing their selection shortly before a 
race, whether or not the original selection was a non-runner. We might have to 
introduce such a rule if people did that so often as to make the scoring 
unmanageable but for now it happens only rarely.

This week’s prize is offered by the tipster and analyst Marten Julian. Our 
winner will have access to his ‘RoyalAscot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> Package’, including his preview books 
(available as PDFs and in hard copy), an online preview the night before each 
day’s racing and text messages on race mornings.

If you don’t win, you can order it here. 
<http://www.martenjulian.com/trolleyed/2/> To kick things off, we’d like your 
selections, please, for these races:4.30 Ayr, 7.45 Pontefract, 9.00 Windsor. 

As ever, our champion will be the tipster who returns the best profit to 
notional level stakes of £1 at starting price on our nominated races, of which 
there will be three each day up until Friday. Non-runners count as losers. In 
the event of a tie at the end of the week, the winner will be the tipster who, 
from among those tied on the highest score, posted their tips earliest on the 
final day.

For terms and conditions click here <http:// 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/sep/07/talking-horses-tipping-competition-terms-and-conditions>
.

Good luck!


And post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 