
4pm: Champion Stakes result

Ascot 3.45

1 Almanzor (C Soumillon) 11-8 Fav 

2 Found (R L Moore) 5-2 

3 Jack Hobbs (W Buick) 7-1 

10 ran 

Almanzor confirmed his reputation as the best colt of the Classic generation 
with another stunning display in the Qipco Champion Stakes atAscot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot>.

Trained by the champion trainer of France, Jean-Claude Rouget, he followed up 
his Irish Champion Stakes win by beating Found once again.

Given Aidan O’Brien’s mare won the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe in between her 
races against Almanzor, it shows just how good the Wootton Bassett colt is.

From his draw in stall one Christophe Soumillon was at pains to make sure he 
was not trapped in against the rails and while he ended up in a pocket at one 
stage, Almanzor was good enough that it made no difference.

The Grey Gatsby returned to form and hit the front, taking over from Racing 
History with two furlongs to run, but Soumillon looked cool.

Ryan Moore moved Found up on his outside but Almanzor, the 11-8 favourite, 
showed a blistering turn of foot once more to win by two lengths.

Jack Hobbs ran a tremendous race on his comeback, staying on for third. 

Soumillon said: “He is an amazing horse. Everything you do with him looks 
easy, it just shows you how good he is. I never thought at the beginning of the 
season he would be that strong the whole year. He is getting smarter and 
smarter.

“A few horses were going left and right in the beginning, I was trying to get 
a good position but unfortunately I had to go on the inside. When I came on the 
outside with The Grey Gatsby I knew he was going to give me something.

“I came a bit early for him and I knew Found was there and how strong she is, 
so I was giving him a chance to finish well and the last 100 yards he kept 
going. We have never tried a mile and a half but I am sure he will stay.”PA

3.55pm: Almanzor wears the crown in Champion Stakes

Tony Paley: Almanzor proved himself a true champion when beating Found to win 
the Champion Stakes. The French Derby and Irish Champion Stakes winner 
benefited from a fine ride by Christophe Soumillon who got a good early 
position from stall one with Found, who Ryan Moore steered into a position 
behind the eventual winner after a furlong, letting his rival get first run 
after the home turn. Jack Hobbs ran an excellent race, finishing in excellent 
style to take third.

3.20pm: QEII Stakes result


Ascot 3.10

1 Minding (R L Moore) 7-4 Fav 

2 Ribchester (W Buick) 7-2 

3 Lightning Spear (Oisin Murphy) 9-1 

13 ran 

Minding showed the boys a clean pair of heels to notch another Group One 
triumph in the Queen Elizabeth II Stakes at Ascot. On the go all season, Aidan 
O’Brien’s brilliant filly already had the 1,000 Guineas, Oaks and Nassau Stakes 
in the bag and had run well in the Irish Champion Stakes behind Almanzor and 
Found.

Dropped back to a mile for the first time since her surprise reverse in the 
Irish Guineas, she was not inconvenienced in the slightest, travelling strongly 
throughout for Ryan Moore.

Jet Setting led the group on the near side with Galileo Gold racing keenly 
behind her, while on the far side Barchan, making the pace for Ribchester, was 
giving the perfect lead to Minding with Ribchester behind her.

Approaching the final furlong Moore kicked clear and gained a decisive 
two-length advantage, which his mount needed in the end as several closed her 
down.

Ribchester made good late gains to close to within half a length of the 7-4 
favourite, with a further length back to Lightning Spear.

O’Brien said: “It’s unbelievable, she’s an incredible filly. The last day she 
worked, Seamus (Heffernan) got off her and we couldn’t believe it. It’s a big 
team effort, as you can imagine.

“I can’t say how delighted I am for everybody but she’s an incredible filly - 
a mile, a mile and a half then bring her back to a mile in an all-aged Group 
One against the boys, they have to be special to do those things.

“I’d imagine that would be it for this year and the lads have talked about 
bringing her back next year, hopefully. To stay a mile and a half and then do 
that over a mile, they have to be very special.”

Moore, bagging the first Champions Day meeting success of his career, said: 
“Really delighted with her today. She’s had a hard season and to bring her back 
to a mile is some achievement really. She was too good for them, too strong. 
She has lots of pace and masses of talent.”PA

3.15pm: Minding sails home for smooth win in QEII Stakes

Tony Paley: The Aidan O’Brien-trained Minding was a convincing winner of the 
QEII Stakes after Ryan Moore, riding his first winner at the Champions Day 
meeting, kicked clear in the closing stages to beat Ribchester and Lightning 
Spear.

2.45pm: Qipco Fillies & Mares result

Ascot 2.35

1 Journey (L Dettori) 4-1 

2 Speedy Boarding (F Tylicki) 14-1 

3 Queen’s Trust (Andrea Atzeni) 11-1 

13 ran 

5-4 Fav Seventh Heaven


Journey went one better than last year when running out a hugely impressive 
winner of the Qipco British Champions Fillies & Mares Stakes at Ascot. Trained 
by John Gosden and ridden expertly by Frankie Dettori, she had been trained 
with this specific race in mind all season.

In what turned out to be a messy renewal, the Aidan O’Brien-trained favourite 
Seventh Heaven was slowly away and never in a position to challenge from her 
draw in stall 13. Ryan Moore tried to take his medicine early by taking a pull 
on leaving the stalls and then looking for a gap on the rails but it never 
appeared.

Pretty Perfect was allowed a six-length lead at one point with Dettori heading 
the chasing pack and he still looked full of running turning in. When Dettori 
pressed the button the response was immediate and Journey shot clear, winning 
at 4-1 by four lengths.

James Fanshawe’s Prix de l’Opera winner Speedy Boarding ran another blinder 
finishing second, with Queen’s Trust third and Seventh Heaven hot on their 
heels.

Dettori said: “She deserved a Group One, she has been running so well. I can’t 
believe the turn of foot she showed today, she picked up like she had roller 
skates. She is a joy to ride and well done to the owners.”PA

2.40pm: Frankie gives Journey right trip in Fillies & Mares

Tony Paley: Frankie Dettori booted home a popular winner in the shape of 
well-backed 4-1 shot Journey in the Qipco Fillies & Mares Stakes. The race was 
a slow one in the early stages with pacemaker Pretty Perfect virtually ignored 
up front. Dettori was in the right place just behind the leader on the home 
turn, and his John Gosden-trained mount quickened clear for a convincing 
success in the end from Speedy Boarding and Queen’s Trust.

2.30pm: Ground riding faster than official ‘good’

Tony Paley: The ground is almost certainly riding faster than the official 
good. Graham Cunningham and Jim McGrath suggested that could be the case on 
Channle 4 Racing after the latest race and At The Races’ expert Hugh Taylor has 
tweeted to back that up. The time of the Sprint Stakes suggests punters should 
beware horses that need cut in the ground for the rest of the day’s action.
Hugh Taylor (@HughRacing) 
if time of last Ascot race is 1:12.15, it's faster than any of the 11 runnings 
of Golden/Diamond Jubilee (run in June!) since track reopened
 <https://twitter.com/HughRacing/status/787281159390633984> October 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HughRacing/status/787281159390633984> 
2.15pm: Qipco Sprint Stakes result

Ascot 2.00

1 The Tin Man (T P Queally) 13-2 

2 Growl (G Lee) 50-1 

3 Brando (T Eaves) 14-1 

13 ran 

4-1 Jt Favs Quiet Reflection, Shalaa

The Tin Man fired Tom Queally back into the big time by emulating his 
half-brother Deacon Blues in winning the Qipco British Champions Sprint at 
Ascot. Trained by James Fanshawe, just like Deacon Blues, The Tin Man was 
supplemented into the race last year but could only finish fourth.

An interrupted campaign has seen him win only once but he chased home Quiet 
Reflection at Haydock in the Sprint Cup, suggesting he was up to this class. 
Quiet Reflection was fancied to win a third Group One of the season for Karl 
Burke, but she never threatened to get involved.

French raider Signs Of Blessing stole a march with two furlongs to run and 
went two lengths clear, but with 100 yards to go he was running on empty. 
Queally delivered 13-2 chance The Tin Man widest of all and he struck by a 
length from Ayr Gold Cup runner-up Growl (50-1), with the winner of that race, 
Brando, in third and Signs Of Blessing fourth.

It was a particularly sweet moment for Queally, who since the retirement of 
Frankel has been absent from the limelight at the big meetings. Queally said: 
“I’ve always felt he was potentially the best horse in the field and he proved 
to be. He just needs cover, thankfully he got it and proved how good he is.

“It’s a special day for the team. I’ve probably got more of a kick out of this 
winner than any of the big winners I’ve had - when you go through a bit of a 
drought it means a bit more. My whole family will get a buzz out of this.”

Fanshawe said: “All year it has been stop-start with him, he had a problem in 
the spring and I’ve not been able to get him ready. We didn’t have the 
smoothest run going to [Royal] Ascot, then we had a small problem after that 
and before his next race we had the coughing.

“My son Tom rides him out every day so it has been a good team effort and it’s 
great when you think they are right and they perform like that. He’s owned by a 
syndicate set up by my wife, there are 10 shares and it enables people to get 
involved in a horse like this. It’s great that he’s a half-brother to Deacon 
Blues who won this in 2011. It was a hot race, I walked the course and in the 
past you’ve wanted to be drawn high but I was quite happy we were low today.”PA

2.10pm: Tin Man finds right road to Sprint success

Tony Paley: Don’t say you weren’t told. Our chief tipster Chris Cook is having 
a superb Champions Day and The Tin Man, the 13-2 winner, made it two out of two 
for him when winning the Qipco Sprint Stakes. A red-letter day too for 
Frankel’s jockey, Tom Queally, who has not had a success at this meeting for 
four years since the retirement of the wonder horse with whom he was famously 
associated. He brought the James Fanshawe-trained first with a strong late run 
to beat 50-1 shot Growl and 14-1 chance Brando.

1.40pm: Qipco Long Distance Cup result 

Ascot 1.25 

1 Sheikhzayedroad (M Harley) 11-1 

2 Quest For More (G Baker) 9-1 

3 Simple Verse (Oisin Murphy) 6-1 

10 ran 

4-6 Fav Order Of St George 4th

Jockey Martin Harley was never too far away on the consistent seven-year-old 
Sheikhzayedroad, winner of the Doncaster Cup last time out, as Nearly Caught 
and Quest For More were allowed to set a sedate pace. Harley was content in 
third on the David Simcock-trained stayer, with Simple Verse, Litigant and the 
Aidan O’Brien-trained favourite Order Of St George in mid-division.

Turning into the straight the leaders kicked and it was clear anything from 
off the pace would struggle to make up the ground, but Harley’s tactical nous 
came to the fore and he was well placed to strike. Simple Verse and Order Of St 
George were closing deep inside the final furlong, with Quest For More once 
again running out of his skin, but the 11-1 winner scored by half a length. 
Quest For More clung on for second with Simple Verse another half a length back 
in third and Gold Cup hero Order Of St George only fourth.

Harley said: “I’m out of breath! He always delivers on the big day - full 
credit to the horse, he’s tough. They didn’t go very quick, but my lad has won 
over shorter so I knew he had a change of gear. David thought he would be in 
the money, and a furlong down I knew I had the front two covered.”

Simcock said: “Martin gave him a lovely ride and it was nice how it panned 
out. Nearly Caught set a nice marker and he could get into a rhythm and that’s 
what suits him. He’s such an easy horse to train, he trains himself - all he 
does is show his well-being at home. The head man rides him and tells me he’s 
well, I trust him. We knew he was in pretty good shape. I don’t normally get 
excited watching my horses but I did today, it’s an important day, a wonderful 
day’s racing so to win with an old pro like this makes it worthwhile.”PA

1.35pm: Sheikhzayedroad lifts the Cup


Tony Paley: A great start for Guardian tipster Chris Cook as Sheikhzayedroad 
triumphs at a rewarding 11-1 in the Qipco Long Distance Cup. The winner and the 
eventual second, Quest For More, were always prominent in what looked a 
modestly-run race. Hot favourite Order Of St George made good ground from 
midfield in the short home straight but was only fourth at the line. A poor 
start for the all-conquering Aidan O’Brien stable and, remarkably, Ryan Moore 
is still waiting for his first win at the Champions Day meeting.

1.20pm: Stickels reports “decent” ground

Tony Paley: Ascot clerk of the course Chris Stickels said: “It was dry 
overnight, but we are forecast to have the occasional light shower during 
racing. There is heavier rain forecast later but we think that will come after 
the racing has finished so we should have a mainly dry day. I am really looking 
forward to the day - we have been blessed with a great card. We have fantastic 
races to look forward to on decent ground so it should be a good day.

He added: “On the far side of the straight, there is ground that has been 
saved since July so there is fresh ground on the far side. There is also fresh 
ground on the round course against the rail which has been saved since July so 
we have guaranteed some really decent ground for a great day’s racing.”

11.25am: Going and non-runner news

Tony Paley: The GoingStick readings at 7.45am today at Ascot following a dry 
night were: Straight Course: 8.9; Round Course: 7.8. Ascot is describing the 
going as good so, in time-honoured tradition, there “should be no excuses for 
any horses” at least where the ground is concerned.

In other news, Ascot report that “the straight course has been divided in two 
with a rail in the middle of the course and the far side will be used for 
today’s racing. The rail on the round course is at its innermost position so 
distances are as advertised. There are possible occasional showers forecast.”

The only non-runner in so far is Instant Attraction in the 4.25 race.

Today’s TV races guide by Chris Cook

Fast ground at Ascot today would have been most unwelcome for last year’s 
Champion Stakes winner,Fascinating Rock (3.45), so it was an important moment 
for him when officials decided on Wednesday to run this year’s race on the 
outer track. The going might be no softer than good there but that will be fine 
for Dermot Weld’s runner, whereas it would have been firm in places on the new 
inner track.

Aidan O’Brien seeks fitting climax to year of extraordinary dominance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/aidan-obrien-climax-season-extraordinary-dominance>
Now that summer ground has been avoided, Weld’s plan to save his horse for an 
autumn campaign may finally bear fruit. It was no great surprise that he came 
up short on his reappearance in August, as he had needed his comeback run at 
the same stage of the 2015 season, but things went wrong when blood tests 
showed he was not at his peak in the days before last month’s Irish Champion.

He is thought to have recovered from that, to the extent that Weld considered 
a tilt at the Arc a fortnight ago. Instead, he comes fresh to the course and 
distance where he fared so well last year, beating Found, as he did so again in 
Ireland in May.

While a wide draw should not be a great problem for a hold-up horse like him, 
stall one could be an issue for the favourite, Almanzor, who may need luck when 
the time comes to make a move.

1.25 Ascot This is asking a serious question of Order Of St George, just two 
weeks after he was in the heat of Arc battle from start to finish. It has the 
feel of an afterthought outing and taking odds-on in the circumstances is a 
real statement of faith in the skills of his trainer,Aidan O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/aidan-obrien-climax-season-extraordinary-dominance>
. At 16-1, there may be each-way value inSheikhzayedroad, who will appreciate 
the dry surface and has had a fine season in staying races. He has five lengths 
to make up on the favourite from their Gold Cup form, when softish ground was 
not ideal for him.

2.00 Ascot Neither Quiet Reflection nor Mecca’s Angel have got their preferred 
ground and the latter will be stretched by a sixth furlong, while Shalaa’s form 
leaves him something to prove. Perhaps this is the time forThe Tin Man, a game 
second to Quiet Reflection last time after blowing the start and now getting a 
much drier surface.

2.35 Ascot There is no picking holes in the form of Seventh Heaven, a 
convincing winner over Found when last seen in the Yorkshire Oaks.

3.10 Ascot Minding is not entirely convincing as favourite on this return to a 
mile, a distance at which she has not won since 1 May.Ribchester has improved 
through the season, looking a shade unlucky in the Sussex before getting his 
big day in the Marois last time. That sets the standard and he will be hard to 
contain if running to a similar level.

4.25 Ascot Improved by Ger Lyons to win the Irish Cambridgeshire, Sea Wolf may 
have more to offer.
 