
After more than a decade of war, formal talks between the Afghan government 
and theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> will begin in the 
coming weeks, the country’s president has told key aides.

According to a senior government official, the president, Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, believes meetings could begin 
in early March after Pakistan signalled its support for the move.

Previous western-sponsored attempts to get Afghan government and Taliban 
representatives around the same table failed under Ghani’s predecessor, Hamid 
Karzai.

Although the Afghan Taliban’s spokesman denied there were any plans for talks, 
hopes are rising following Pakistan’s decision to pressurise the insurgent 
leadership.

On Tuesday, Gen Raheel Sharif, Pakistan’s powerful military chief, travelled 
to Kabul to tell Ghani the Taliban were increasingly amenable to discussions.

Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> has considerable 
influence over the Taliban, a movement that was supported by Islamabad in the 
1990s and which since 2001 has been free to use Pakistani territory to launch 
attacks against the western-backed government in Kabul.

Since becoming president last year, Ghani has worked assiduously to secure 
Pakistan’s help in bringing the Taliban to the negotiating table by addressing 
Pakistani fears thatAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> 
is a base for its enemies.

Ghani has won plaudits from Islamabad by putting on a hold an arms deal with 
Pakistan’s arch-rival India and by deploying troops against anti-Pakistan 
militants based in Afghan territory.

In return Ghani expects Pakistan to tell the Taliban to enter negotiations and 
drastically reduce the surge in militant attacks inside Afghanistan.

Sartaj Aziz, the foreign affairs adviser to Pakistan’s prime minister, said 
reports of an immediate breakthrough were premature but that progress had been 
made amid the “quite unprecedented” improvement in relations between 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.

“These things have been going on for the last few weeks,” he said, referring 
to contacts between Taliban and the Afghan government. “We suggest the right 
kind of people to talk to and that kind of thing, but this is an Afghan-led 
process.”

Pakistan has also been pressured to bring the Taliban to the negotiating table 
by powerful ally China, which is alarmed by the overspill of militancy in the 
region into western China.

Previous attempts to find a political solution to the 13-year war in 
Afghanistan came to nothing. In 2013, the Taliban was allowed to open an 
“office” in Doha, the capital of the Gulf state of Qatar, where talks could be 
held.

But the process collapsed before it could begin after the Afghan government 
reacted furiously to the Taliban beingallowed to raise their flag over the 
building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/20/taliban-doha-diplomacy-afghanistan>
 as if it was the embassy of a sovereign power.

On Thursday, the US embassy in Kabul denied reported claims by Afghan Taliban 
sources that insurgent leaders would hold an initial round of talks with US 
officials as early as Thursday.

“There is no truth to the reports of US involvement in direct talks with the 
Taliban,” a US diplomat said.

Ajmal Obaid Abidy, spokesman for Ghani, said the international community had 
accepted demands that peace talks be conducted between the Afghan government 
and the Taliban, not with outside actors. So the reports of directs talks 
between the US and the Taliban, Abidy said, “are only rumours”.

Michael Semple, one of the world’s experts on the movement, said Doha was the 
most likely site of any talks as the Taliban’s “political commission” is 
already based there.

But he warned there was no guarantee talks would succeed given the Taliban 
have ramped up attacks in recent months.

“I don’t think we’ve seen the signs on the Taliban side that they are 
preparing to end the war,” he said. “Maybe there will be a round of talks, but 
the real test will be whether there will be another spring military campaign.”

Afghan analysts say Ghani will not be able to sustain his tilt towards 
Pakistan, which is proving unpopular with sections of the public, unless he is 
rewarded with a sharp decline in violence.

This week Ghani attempted to sooth the concerns of powerbrokers, including 
former president Hamid Karzai, who was famously distrustful of Pakistan.

“Ghani’s biggest challenge is if the coffins keep coming,” said Bilal Sarwary, 
one of the country’s top journalists. “But the Taliban have only been preparing 
to fight.”
 