
It’s four years since Triolo D’Alene (3.35), a former French ingenue 
five-year-old, made his British debut atAscot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> and won a good handicap chase despite 
collecting a few fences along the way. There have been at least as many low 
moments as high points since then but at his best this chestnut has looked very 
classy and he could get his first Grade One victory back at the Berkshire track 
today.

Victoria Pendleton falls on racecourse jumps debut at Fakenham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/victoria-pendleton-falls-racecourse-jumps-debut-fakenham-pacha-du-polder>
This is an Ascot Chase rather light on in-form animals and the market-leader 
is Silviniaco Conti, who hardly ever races over such a short distance. A case 
can certainly be made for him if, as we’re told, he is over the sarcoid 
problems that have hindered him this season but he is an unappealing favourite.

At 6-1, Triolo D’Alene might be more like it, especially if judged on his 
Kempton success last month, when he was clearly travelling best before his main 
rival unseated. It may be worth putting a line through the failures of last 
season, when the chasers from his Lambourn yard were unusually unproductive, 
and remembering him as the classy type who won a Hennessy and a Topham.

Saturday’s best bets, by Chris Cook

1.50 Ascot Onenightinvienna is the buzz horse here and, despite his novice 
status, has been backed for the Grand National. He looks short of speed and, 
with his yard possibly not so hot as earlier in the season, he could be 
vulnerable toDrumacoo, who looked a fine chasing prospect on his recent debut 
for Ben Pauling.

2.05 Haydock Nearly all of these are on a recovery mission after various 
disappointments.One Track Mind rather flopped on his reappearance but he 
justified market support last time and seems ready for this step into Graded 
company.

2.25 Ascot Vieux Lion Rouge’s first failure over fences came last time at 
Cheltenham when he unseated three-out. He seemed likely to get into the 
argument with the useful winner that day and gets to compete off the same 
handicap rating here, fresher for a two-month break.

2.40 Haydock The form book says Rigadin De Beauchene fell last time but he was 
essentially knocked over by a loose horse. A winner on his previous start, he 
hacked up in this race two years ago and is only 2lb higher now.

3.00 Ascot Successful on his handicap debut when last seen in December, 
Montdragon still appeared to be learning the game that day. This more galloping 
circuit may help him and he should still be ahead of his rating.

3.20 Wincanton If the best of Irving is on show here, he’ll win but he has 
regularly failed to produce his best in the second half of the season and 
flopped when last seen.Pain Au Chocolat is interesting at 6-1 for the yard that 
won this with another outsider last year. He has improved for the switch to 
fences this winter but also had some classy hurdles form last year and could 
pinch a weak-looking contest.

Post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 