
Hunger has stalked Zainab Abu all five years of her life. Her parents can only 
afford to feed her ugali, a stiff porridge, twice a day. Her health is 
inevitably suffering.

"Zainab is not happy," says her father, Salehe, his eyes lowered with sorrow. 
"She frequently has stomach problems. The doctor says it's because of the food 
she's taking. But there's no choice. Life is difficult but we have to tolerate 
it."

Zainab has suffered fevers, possibly malaria, in her short life. The family is 
doing its best to give her a normal upbringing.

The girl smiles as she says, "I'm in class two. I'm five years old."

Her list of "likes" includes rice, TV comedy and playing hide and seek. And: 
"I like toys I can put on my back."

Asked if she knows what she wants to do when she has grown up, Zainab looks at 
a worker from Unicef and says: "I want to be like you."

That her parents own mobile phones should not be taken as evidence that they 
are anything but desperately poor. There are 20 people in the family and none 
has a job. Tragedy has been a frequent companion in the past five years.

Zainab's parents lost a baby last year. The girl survived only a few hours, 
not long enough to be given a name. "There was a lot of grief," says Salehe.

That same year, Zainab's mother, Rehema, endured the death of a sister, 
Monica, from tuberculosis. She was 30.

But the child's grandmother, Mwajabu Juma, lives on. "I think I'm more than 
30," she says, eyes twinkling, and the gathering bursts into laughter. "I'm not 
sure when I was born."

"I hope and believe Zainab will have a good life. I'm not worried about her. 
But I'm weak, I've got problems with bone pains," she adds.

Talk of the UN, millennium development goals and politics seems remote here. 
Mwajabu muses in a matter-of-fact way: "My station is so poor, I don't know 
anything. I don't know the government or donors, I don't go anywhere."

The multigenerational family occupies a maze of crumbling concrete structures 
in a natural basin, accessed from Dar es Salaam via bumpy roads, lines of 
shacks and a jumble of tin and wood spaza (convenience) shops.

There is no electricity and a big pile of plastic buckets illustrates how far 
they must walk for water. Food is cooked on a charred brick stove and the 
toilet is a hole in the ground. Flies buzz in the heat, hens strut through dirt 
and dust drifts into eyes and mouths.

Zainab and her brother, Richard, 7, walk 1.3 miles to school every day. 
Tanzania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tanzania> has made primary 
schooling free and achieved near 100% enrolment, putting it on course to 
achieve the millennium development goal for universal education, but critics 
say quality has been sacrificed for quantity.

"If we had to pay school fees we wouldn't have managed," says their father, 
who lives off one meal a day. "But it's not a very good education because it's 
overcrowded and because of the way the teachers teach. We're trying to work 
hard for a better school. It is our wish that they complete school, poor as we 
are. I would like both of them to be members of parliament."

Factfile: Tanzania

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 104

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 96.6%

Debt per capita: $55.48 (£35.45)

Life expectancy: 53

% children in education (F/M): 80.8/84.5
 