


Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> steel has been forced to 
write off $1.6 billion (£1.04bn) from the value of its assets, raising 
questions about the future of its UK business.

The steel conglomerate, which employs 18,500 people at former Corus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/corus> steelworks in Britain, blamed the 
huge writedown on weak demand in Europe since the onset of the global economic 
slowdown.

"The impairment is primarily due to a weaker macroeconomic and market 
environment in Europe where apparent steel demand has fallen significantly in 
2012-13 by almost 8%, which in aggregate results in almost 30% since the 
emergence of the global financial crisis in 2007," the company said in a note 
to the Mumbai Stock Exchange on Monday.

It said it expected no let up from the downturn in the medium term.

The writedown, the largest ever by an Indian company, is the latest chapter in 
Tata's unhappy European saga, since India's largest steel producer bought 
Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007. The company described the £6.6bn deal as 
a milestone, but industry analysts thought they had overpaid for Corus – a 
descendant of British Steel.

The writedown has reignited rumours that the company may try to sell some of 
its UK plants and will heighten interest in its annual results, due on 23 May.

In April Bloomberg reported that Tata was toying with selling UK assets, in a 
report that noted the company had racked up losses of 7.63bn rupees (£91m) in 
the last three months of 2012.

A company spokesman said on Monday: "We do not comment on rumour and 
speculation." The company also partly attributed the writedown to 
underperforming businesses in South Africa and Thailand.

Since buying Corus, Tata, which generates two-thirds of its output in Europe, 
has struggled to square falling demand with slumping prices and rising costs. 
European Union-based steel producers have the capacity to make about 79 million 
tonnes more steel than they can sell, according to recent analysis by the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Tata, the world's 6th 
largest steelmaker, has capacity to produce 28m tonnes worldwide.

Last year Tata angered unions by cutting 900 jobs, mainly at Port Talbot, 
south Wales, and closing down 12 finishing and processing plants in the UK. The 
company employs about 4,000 people in Port Talbot and a similar number in 
Scunthorpe, as well as 2,000 in South Yorkshire.

Tata is not alone in seeing the value of its asset book shrink. Last December 
the world's largest steelmaker ArcelorMittal was forced to write off €3.9bn 
(£2.4bn) in the value of its assets, because of weak demand in Europe. The 
company ran into a political storm in France when it announced it was closing 
two furnaces, prompting a French government minister to accuse ArcelorMittal of 
disrespecting the country.

Germany's largest steelmaker ThyssenKrupp announced in 2012 that €3.9bn 
(£2.4bn) had been wiped off the value of its South American and US business 
after a disastrous overseas investment strategy.

Shares in Tata Steel on the Indian stock exchange were down 4% at 305 rupees 
on Monday.
 