
At 7.30am, breakfast begins with a protein shake, yoghurt and a bagel with 
peanut butter. During the rest of the day, it's sushi if possible, as well as 
red meat, pasta and rice, spread over six meals in a 6,000-calories-a-day diet 
washed down with at least six litres of water. No alcohol, processed foods or 
sugar.

Welcome to the world of the uber-fit Andy Murray, who is contesting his third 
grand slam final on the trot against Novak Djokovic in Sunday'sAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Not so long ago Murray was 
sometimes dismissed as callow, temperamental and, when mixing it with the likes 
of Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer, just a bit of a lightweight. No longer. 
Emotional maturity has been accompanied by a winning physique.

A 90-minute Bikram yoga morning session, in almost unbearable heat, precedes 
hours at the gym combining stretches, conditioning and intense weight training. 
An ice bath and a massage round off the day. It is a regime that has turned 
Murray into a 6ft 3in, 13½ stone tennis powerhouse who's coming ever closer to 
dominating the men's game.

With several of the world's top 20 missing in Melbourne due to injury, today's 
final is further evidence that the brutal intensity of Murray's routine is 
paying off for the Scot, who is certainly acting on his former coach Brad 
Gilbert's belief that top tennis players need to perform "like an ironman in a 
triathlon". His team say he is approaching his physiological peak and reaping 
the rewards.

It is a far cry from Roland Garros seven years ago. "Murray's fragile teenage 
body lets him down again," ran the headlines as the then 18-year-old crashed 
out to Gaël Monfils in the first round of the French Open. As his ankles gave 
way, the young Scot sloped off home to watch Nadal, 11 months his elder, 
rampage to his second successive title. But as Nadal sits out yet another major 
with rumours that his tendinitis-ravaged knees may cause him to retire after 11 
grand slam tournament wins, Murray marches on.

He will be cheered on by Team Murray – the quartet who have transformed the 
promising teenager into one of the world's toughest athletes. After becoming 
his coach a year ago, former world No 1 Ivan Lendl had the sense to leave in 
place Murray's supporting cast.

Trainers Matt Little and Jez Green hone Murray's strength and conditioning 
while physiotherapist Andy Ireland's comprehensive knowledge of Murray's body 
ensures recovery time is minimised and healing rates maximised. Murray's friend 
and hitting partner Dani Vallverdu completes the squad. The team has compiled a 
programme that makes many of Murray's rivals sweat just studying it. And Murray 
knows the result of their six-year regime has made him almost unbeatable. He 
has lost just three grand slam matches in his past 31.

Little works on Murray's stretching routine and preventing injury while 
monitoring nutrition. Green takes over at the gym and has doubled Murray's 
weekly weight-training sessions, adding three more pounds of muscle.

Murray, a big boxing fan, joked in his Open column for The Australian about 
returning some of the treatment his team dish out to him, saying he would like 
to take Little on in a boxing match one day: "A fan asked me whether I could 
ever see myself doing something like Andrew Flintoff has done. 'Freddie' won 
his first fight a month ago, but I read recently that he hurt his shoulder 
while training, so I'm not sure whether he will lace up the gloves again. There 
is no way I would ever consider doing something like that on a professional 
basis, but when it comes to jumping into the ring against a couple of my team, 
that is a different matter."

Murray knows his team has turned him into a tennis monster, and the US Open 
champion will need to call on his powers of recovery again today, after 
enduring a tough four-hour match against Federer in Friday's semi-final. 
Djokovic destroyed David Ferrer in just one hour 29 minutes a day earlier.

Murray's close friend Jamie Baker also acknowledged the benefits of sharing 
winter training facilities in Florida each year, and the improvement it brings 
to his performances. "We train differently but if we went up against each other 
he'd probably beat me in everything," Baker said last week. "Look at him, he's 
like a tank. The difference is that he has had six or seven years of a regular 
diet of that volume of training. When he first started working with Jez and 
Matt he was still training hard, so he's got to a point now where he can cope 
with anything that's thrown at him."

As Robin Soderling, John Isner and Mardy Fish joined Nadal in not making 
Melbourne, and Janko Tipsaveric and Juan Monaco retired injured, Murray is 
living proof that good things do come to those who weight.
 