
For the second year running, the loser of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> let his tears do the 
talking, but Andy Murray's lachrymose reflection on his straight-sets defeat by 
Roger Federer was at least eased by the winner's prediction that it is only a 
matter of time before he wins a grand slam title.

Here in 2009, Federer cried uncontrollably after losing to Rafael Nadal, and 
the images went around the world – as did those of Murray on Sunday night as a 
packed Rod Laver Arena responded warmly to the Scot's speech of touching 
self-deprecation. "I can cry like Roger," he said. "It's just a shame I can't 
play like him ... I'm done ... sorry."

Murray will go away, rest, then examine the good and not-so-good points of a 
highly charged final. The significant plus is the respect of the best player in 
the world. Federer, who now owns 16 slam titles, said of his own continued 
excellence: "That's thanks to guys like Murray. They've made me a better 
player, because I think this has been one of my finest performances in a long 
time, or maybe forever.

"[Murray] is a wonderful mover, ­tactician, great backhand. He has got 
everything you need to win big tournaments. He's extremely strong in his mind 
and I just feel like he's got the game to [win a slam]. The question is when."

The downside was Federer's post-match view that Murray was still "a bit 
passive". He did not capitalise on chances at key moments, especially after 
breaking Federer in the third set and again in an agonisingly long tie-break. 
Federer won 6-3, 6-4, 7-6 (13-11) and Murray, despite a decent start and a 
rousing finish, was rarely able to stem either the power or the ingenuity of 
the Swiss's near-perfect game.

He did not feel weighed down by the expectations in Britain to end the 74-year 
drought since Fred Perry's last grand slam win. He said: "Once you get on the 
court, it's not what you're thinking about. At all. I would liked to have done 
it for everyone back home, won the tournament, obviously for myself and for the 
people I work with as well. I had chances in the first set. He started to play 
a lot better in the second set. In the third set, I had more of the chances. I 
thought I deserved to take it into a fourth, but it didn't happen."

He said he cried because he had come so close to extending the match. "It was 
a complete blowout. If I had lost three, four and two, it probably wouldn't 
have ­happened. That was why I was upset."

Federer also beat Murray in straight sets in the Scot's first major final, the 
US Open in 2008. "Tonight's match was a lot closer than the one at Flushing 
Meadows," ­Murray said. "I'm getting closer [to Federer]. To have the 
opportunity to play in these tournaments, in these matches, is pretty 
incredible in the grand scheme of things." And Murray is still definitely in 
the grand scheme of things.
 