
Tefl (teaching English as a foreign language) is popular with both graduates 
and career changers. How you write your CV depends on the job specification and 
your background.

General guidelines

Experience and qualifications are two important factors, but specific 
requirements vary worldwide. Use resources such as "Teaching English Abroad" 
(Susan Griffiths),Transitions Abroad 
<http://www.transitionsabroad.com/listings/work/esl/index.shtml> and Dave's ESL 
Cafe <http://www.daveseslcafe.com/> to find out requirements for your chosen 
destination.

In many countries, a degree is necessary for a visa, with a Tefl qualification 
secondary in importance. But many European countries and certain organisations 
require both a qualification (Celta or Trinity Cert Tesol) and experience – 
even for entry-level jobs. Further qualifications, such as the Delta or MA in 
Applied Linguistics are useful for higher-level posts, or certain countries.

However, Joe Hallwood (Guardian Careers' Tefl expert) explains: "We recruit 
for a lot of schools worldwide that don't require experience but only 
entry-level qualifications. While courses with observed teaching practice are 
excellent courses, the vast majority of initial Tefl training is entry-level, 
pre-Celta, training."

For more information, see Choosing the right Tefl course 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/a-guide-to-choosing-the-right-tefl-course>
 andA guide to Tefl qualifications 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/a-guide-to-tefl-accreditations-and-qualifications>
.

If you need to build experience, your options include one-to-one tutoring or 
coaching, voluntary or summer residential course teaching, or even a year 
abroad teaching in a country where experience isn't required.

Preparing to write your CV

Find the most essential requirements in the job description, then make these 
prominent. You may need details such as your date of birth for some countries.

Keep your CV brief, highlighting skills such as training, presenting and 
time-management, for example. Mention experience of living abroad, as it shows 
self-reliance and adaptability. You don't need to know the language of the 
country you want to teach in, though some familiarity helps you settle in 
quicker and reduce culture-shock.

Suggested CV format

Name and contact details

Profile (include qualifications, experience, teaching specialisms)

Example:
Graduate (BA Hons Spanish) and Celta-qualified teacher with two years' 
experience in general English, YL and Cambridge exam preparation (Ket, Pet, 
FCE). Keen traveller with extensive experience in Europe and Asia. Fluent in 
Spanish.

(Optional: career changers can add relevant skills. Technical/job-specific 
skills may position you for business English or English for Specific Purposes, 
for example.)

Professional Experience (put this section before education if you have 
teaching experience or you're a career changer.)

Give details of employers, dates, responsibilities and achievements.

Example:
Language Academy, Barcelona, Sept 2009 – June 2011

Teaching one-to-one, groups of both children and adults, and Cambridge exam 
preparation.

* Increased pass rate from 75% to 85% across Cambridge exams
* Expanded enrolment at a children's afternoon activity club by over 50% in 
eight months
* Developed speaking materials which were adopted by five technical schools
* Regular positive performance appraisals

(Optional: include an endorsement from an ex-employer)

Joe Hallwood advises career changers to pull out relevant non-teaching 
experience. Consider a functional CV grouping experience by theme and give 
employment details.

Example:
Web developer (Sole proprietor) 2004 – 2010
Managing projects for local businesses.

Communication Skills
Performed a "needs analysis" for each client, aligning goals with budgetary 
and time constraints. Client satisfaction ensured repeat business and referrals.

Presented customisable e-commerce and web publishing packages in workshops and 
seminars.

Training
Coached school-leavers in web design / development skills.

Planning and organisation
Provided tailored project plans with regular meetings to assess progress.

Education (this section can precede the employment section if you lack 
experience)

In reverse chronological order, give details of your Tefl qualification 
including specialist modules such as teaching young learners or business 
English; your degree, and other relevant training. Mention extra-curricular 
activities, such as sport or coaching.

(Optional: Hobbies and interests. Joe Hallwood suggests highlighting your 
personality fit. Tie in your interests with the job description such as: 
sporting activities if you're applying for a summer camp.)

A covering letter adds further weight to your application. Say why you're 
interested in the opportunity and give some examples to show your qualities as 
a confident, engaging teacher, who can build rapport with students.

(With thanks for the input from the Guardian's Tefl expert Joe Hallwood. 
<http://www.teflengland.co.uk>)

To get more content and advice like this – including links to forthcoming Q&As 
– direct to your inbox, you can nowsign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 