
Entering the Competition

1. The BAC/A Nation’s Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
competition (the “Competition”) is open to UK residents aged 18 and over.

2. The Competition is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the 
Competition.

3. Entrants into the Competition shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions.

4. To enter the Competition you must enter your name, email address, postal 
address and phone number in the appropriate form, along with a 300-word review 
of a theatrical show. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about 
how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Competition, please email us 
at culture@theguardian.com with “BAC/A Nation’s Theatre Competition” in the 
subject line.

5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us. The winner shall be the 
owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent.

6. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM.

7. The Competition opens on Monday 4 April and closes at 23:59 on Sunday 24 
April. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. GNM 
reserves the right in its absolute discretion to extend the closing date where 
the entries received are of insufficient quality.

8. You own the copyright to your Competition entry as its author.

9. By submitting an entry to the Competition, you give GNM:

 a. Permission for your entry to be published on GNM websites including but 
not limited to theguardian.com (“GNM Websites”) and on any social media account 
controlled by GNM, including but not limited to Facebook and Twitter accounts 
(“GNM Social Media Accounts”), and you grant GNM a non-exclusive, royalty-free, 
worldwide licence to use and publish your Competition entry in electronic 
format (including on GNM Websites and GNM Social Media Accounts) and hard copy 
(including in GNM publications) for purposes connected with the Competition, 
and to adapt the entry to enable such publication (including to crop or 
otherwise edit it for such purposes), and you hereby irrevocably waive, for the 
benefit of GNM, all moral rights in the entry to which you are entitled; and

 b. The right to use your name and county of residence for the sole purpose of 
identifying you as the author of your entry and/or as a winner of the 
Competition.

10. Your entry must not be copied, must not contain any third-party materials 
and/or content that you do not have permission to use, must not promote any 
goods or services or include any trade marks (other than those belonging to the 
Promoter), and must not show inappropriate or dangerous behaviour, or otherwise 
be obscene, defamatory, distasteful, offensive, or in breach of any applicable 
law or regulation, or in breach of any confidentiality obligations owed by you 
to third parties. If we have reason to believe your entry is in breach of this 
paragraph 10 then we may not consider it and may disqualify it.

11. We may disqualify your Competition entry for the following reasons: your 
entry does not comply with these Terms and Conditions; you are not eligible to 
enter the Competition; or you cannot be contacted. In the event of 
disqualification, we may select a new winner in accordance with the selection 
processes outlined below.

Picking the winners

12. A judge from the Guardian Stage team will select one winning entry from 
all valid entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. Full 
details of the judging process are available on request to 
culture@theguardian.com

13. When choosing the winner, the judge will consider reviews that take into 
account the quality of the performances, direction and staging of the 
production, as well as an appraisal of the venue it took place in.

14. The judges will select the winning entry on or after Monday 25 April. The 
judges’ decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.

The prize

15. The winner will receive: expenses paid return travel and three nights stay 
in one of Battersea Arts Centre’s new artist bedrooms from Thursday 26 – 
Saturday 28 May, for two people in a double or twin room; breakfast and dinner 
at Battersea Arts Centre’s Scratch Bar; and complimentary tickets for a 
selection of shows from the A Nation’s Theatre Festival, to be chosen by the 
winner. There will only be one winner, who will then select their guest. GNM 
accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not 
expressly included in the prize.

16. The winner will be notified by phone and email on or after Monday 25 April 
and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to 
GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with 
the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to 
notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their 
prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of 
these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to 
select another winner.

17. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for 
cash or any other prize.

18. GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize 
of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available.

Some other rules

19. The name and county of the winner can be obtained after Friday 29 April by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Stage, 
Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

20. The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Competition and the winner shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winner consents to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the 
Competition for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and 
name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and 
films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and 
its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the 
Competition, all entrants consent to the same.

21. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you 
supply to it as described in itsprivacy policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Competition, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Competition entry, and for the 
purposes outlined above.

22. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the 
liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for 
death or personal injury resulting from its negligence.

23. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Competition is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into.

24. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Competition where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure.

25. The Competition and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Competition submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts.

26. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
 