
Lawyers in the US hailed a landmark victory for civil rights today when a 
judge in a high-profile Guantánamo case barred a witness because of possible 
links to torture at aCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> secret 
prison in Pakistan.

The ruling came at the trial in New York of Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-khalfan-ghailani>, a Tanzanian alleged 
to have been involved in the 1998 bombings of US embassies in Kenya and 
Tanzania in which 224 were killed and about 1,000 injured. He was also alleged 
to have been one of Osama bin Laden's bodyguards.

Ghailani, 36, who has been held at Guantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> detention centre, was 
arrested in Pakistan in 2004 and interrogated by the CIA at one of its secret 
locations round the world.

He is also alleged to have disclosed he bought explosives from another 
Tanzanian, Hussein Abebe.

The prosecution had planned to call Abebe in as a key witness.

But the judge, Lewis Kaplan, issued a three-page ruling barring Abebe on the 
grounds that the CIA may have acquired his name by coercion of Ghailani.

"Abebe was identified and located as a close and direct result of statements 
made by Ghailani while he was held by the CIA," Kaplan said.

He postponed the trial until Tuesday to give the prosecution a chance to 
rethink or appeal.

The Ghailani case is a test of Barack Obama's policy of trying to fulfil a 
pledge to close Guantánamo by moving some of the 174 prisoners to mainland USA 
for trial in civilian courts. Ghailani was moved from Pakistan to Guantánamo in 
2006.

Peter Quijano, a lawyer for Ghailani, told Reuters it was a great victory for 
the constitution. "This case will be tried upon lawfully obtained evidence 
only. Not coercion. Not torture," he said.

The attorney-general, Eric Holder, at a press conference in Washington 
yesterday said it was too early to say whether the ruling was a setback for the 
Obama administration's policy of using civil courts.

"We intend to proceed with this trial," Holder said. "We're looking at the 
ruling that the judge has just handed down and we're going to decide exactly 
how we're going to react."

Without Abebe, the prosecution case appears to be greatly weakened.

One of the prosecutors said last week that Abebe's evidence was essential in 
order to show to a jury that he had bought the explosives with full knowledge 
and intent.

"Indeed without Abebe the government has no way of putting such evidence in 
front of the jury at all," the prosecutor Michael Farbiarz said. He also said: 
"This is a giant witness for the government. There's nothing bigger than him."

The Obama administration's plans to close Guantánamo have come up against 
political problems, with Congress refusing to hand over the money needed to 
establish an alternative prison on the US mainland. Republicans have also 
challenged Obama's move to try cases such as Ghailani's in civil courts, and 
argued in favour of sticking with military tribunals.
 