
Nosa Aimuyo represents a dilemma for the US supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>. The young African American 
student cannot say precisely how he won a place at the University of Texas in 
Austin. His grades were good although not near enough to the top of his class 
to guarantee him entry. But he had a couple of extra strings to his bow as a 
musician and in speaking a foreign language. Then there was the colour of his 
skin.

"I can't say what got me in. I was raised in an upper middle class 
neighbourhood in Dallas, and went to a middle class school so I wasn't 
disadvantaged," said Aimuyo. "But my background is unusual. I was born in 
Oklahoma but my parents are from Nigeria. In school, I played in the band, I 
was a volunteer, I was in French class. There was more to me getting in than 
just my academics and just my race."

The supreme court may see the things differently as it takes up the divisive 
issue of affirmative action in education on Wednesday. The nine judges will 
hear arguments on behalf of a white woman, Abigail Fisher, who says she was 
denied a place at the University ofTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> because black and Latino students 
got precedence. Students such as Aimuyo.

Fisher is backed by an array of interests that see the case as part of a 
broader challenge to civil rights-era laws and policies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/law/2012/sep/06/civil-rights-voting-under-threat-discrimination>
intended to reverse the historic injustices endured by racial minorities, in 
particular African Americans. Those groups argue that even if affirmative 
action was at one time legitimate and necessary – and not all accept that – the 
need for racial preferences is past and they are now unfairly disadvantaging 
white people.

Critics want the court to rule that it is illegal to consider race in any 
shape or form in university admissions, a move that could turn efforts to 
broaden higher education in the US on their head.

The University of Texas says it is a mistake to portray the issue as black and 
white. It argues that race plays a "modest and nuanced" part in its admissions 
procedure as the university seeks to create a diverse student body that also 
takes account of other factors such as class, where the student grew up, school 
performance relative to classmates, and political and religious affiliations.
 Despite its diversity, the University of Texas is not without its racial 
problems. Photograph: Eric Gay/AP 
Greg Vincent, the University of Texas vice-president for diversity, said it is 
difficult to separate race out from the circumstances and experiences that 
shape potential students – and that without taking those on board, white 
students from privileged backgrounds and private schools would have a 
significant advantage.

"You look at all of the factors that make up a person. It's not this neat 
formula. Race is a very important factor in today's society – there's no 
getting around that. But there are many other dimensions about an individual. 
All of those things become a factor. If race doesn't fit into a category it's 
because it's not supposed to," he said.

The university has the backing of Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration>. In a brief to the 
court, it said that diversity in education is a national security issue with 
the military, FBI, CIA and department of homeland security relying on a regular 
supply of well educated recruits from an array of backgrounds.

Colin Powell, the former US secretary of state and ex-chairman of the joint 
chiefs of staff, joined other retired senior military officers in urging the 
supreme court to rule in favour of the University of Texas. So have large 
corporations, including Microsoft and Walmart, which told the supreme court 
that they "must be able to hire highly trained employees of all races, 
religions, cultures and economic backgrounds".

'Race is still a huge determining factor in your quality of life'

Texas has an unusual but not unique law that allocates 75% of places at the 
university to the best performing students in each state-run school. That has 
made its own significant contribution to diversity by, ironically, relying on 
the reality that many Texas schools are effectively segregated by geography, 
class and race.

This year, the top 9% of pupils from every state school – from inner city 
Latino neighbourhoods, wealthy Houston suburbs, poor white rural small towns 
and districts with mostly African American residents – secured automatic places 
at the University of Texas.

The legal fight is over how the remaining 25% of students are admitted – or 
rejected, in Fisher's case.

Her lawyers argue that the automatic entry for top performing students is its 
own form of affirmative action in providing a path for underprivileged Latino 
and black students, and no more is needed. Vincent said it has contributed to 
diversity but it is not enough.

"Things have improved in some significant ways. There's no doubt the world is 
better today than it was 50 years ago. That being said, race is still a huge 
determining factor in your quality of life," he said. "You have at least a 
third of African Americans who are solidly in the underclass, who are mired in 
poverty and have very little opportunity to get out."

The Center for Equal Opportunity is among more than 20 groups and individuals 
filing briefs with the supreme courtin support of Fisher 
<http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publications/supreme_court_preview/briefs/11-345_petitioneramcuplfetal.authcheckdam.pdf>
. Its president, Roger Clegg, who served in senior legal positions in the 
Reagan and Bush senior administrations, calls the university's policy "racial 
gerrymandering".

"The costs of engaging in racial discrimination in college admissions are huge 
and they overwhelm any conceivable benefit. The benefits are negligible if not 
non-existent," said Clegg. "You begin with the fact that by making an exception 
to the principle of non-discrimination you're setting a very dangerous 
precedent and also it's personally unfair to tell somebody that you would have 
gotten in if you'd had a different skin colour. You create resentment. You 
stigmatise so-called beneficiaries."

Almuyo is not among the beneficiaries who feels stigmatised.

"Affirmative action is supposed to remedy a lot of historical inequalities 
that have been the result of the civil rights tensions our country has gone 
through. There's so much less opportunity in underprivileged areas of this 
state," he said. "And so this Fisher case is so important because it could have 
a drastic effect on how the university admits people if the supreme court is 
against it."

Students appreciative of diversity

The University of Texas has been at the heart of a groundbreaking supreme 
court decision on race before.

In 1950, the court struck down the "separate but equal" doctrine when an 
African American man, Heman Sweatt, sued after he was barred from the 
university's law school inAustin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> 
because the Texas state constitution imposed segregation in education. When 
Sweatt took the issue to court, the university established a separate law 
school for black students in Houston. The supreme court ruled that the black 
law school might be separate but it was not equal both in the quality of its 
facilities and teaching staff.

More than 60 years later, a series of supreme court rulings have barred the 
use of racial quotas or a points system based on ethnicity as part of 
university admissions. But the court did permit the consideration of race as an 
influence in pursuit of a diverse student body provided it is not the deciding 
factor.

"One of the reasons why diversity is so important is that having a diverse 
class both promotes cross-cultural, cross-racial understanding and decreases 
the harmful effects of stereotypes," said Vincent.

That does not mean the University of Texas is without its racial problems. 
Last week, a few hundred students led a protest march through the campus 
against incidents of racism including the throwing of balloons filled with 
bleach at black students. Four such attacks took place last month alone.

Students at the University of Texas generally said they appreciated the value 
of diversity because it brought different experiences and ideas into the 
classroom. But that did not necessarily translate into support for racial 
preferences.

"I think on a college application you shouldn't even be able to print what 
your ethnicity is," Kaitlin Valentine, a biology major. "They just shouldn't 
even look at that. Then the top people would get in. That would be the 
criteria."

Adison Martinez, an information science student who describes his family as 
Anglo even though he has a Hispanic name, is also sceptical.

"I don't think racial discrimination is as pressing as it used to be. I know 
Hispanics do fall under the umbrella of being a minority but in Texas I don't 
feel like there's discrimination against Hispanics," he said. "My relatives are 
in north Texas, and they say they're white people and a minority now. Obviously 
there's so many minorities they're displacing white people in Texas."

But Sam Hermitte, a graduate student at studying public affairs, scorns that 
view.

"Until there's equal treatment all the way up the pipeline, I don't think you 
can be at the end of the pipeline and say now everything's completely level 
when others haven't had the same opportunities for education because they grew 
up in poor areas. There are lots of things that are still very inequitable in 
the system and so I think it is still necessary in the university," she said.
 