
One of the first things you see when you arrive in Bangkok is a poster. 
"Thailand", it reads at the top, and underneath are four boxes showing weather 
forecast symbols and dates. 1997 shows a thunderstorm, 1998 heavy rain. By 
1999, sun is peeping through the cloud. And the box for 2000 shows the beaming 
sun usually stuck over Malaga on a weather map. In big capitals along the 
bottom it reads simply: "INVEST NOW!"

You barely notice the poster at first, too distracted by the exotic chaos of 
the city, the monks and the tuk-tuks and the temples and the smells you at 
first assume are the drains, and later realise are in fact the food. But by the 
time you leave, the poster has come to read more like the country's national 
mission statement. Travel agents and travellers love to coo about the mystical 
holiness of Thailand, but Thailand is actually much more interested in money, 
and will do almost anything to make it. And if Westerners were honest about it, 
that is precisely why they come here.

For those of us who don't fully grasp global economic complexities, Bangkok is 
like an idiot's guide to the tiger economies. From a hotel balcony high above 
the city, it looks like a gleaming first-world forest of hi-tech skyscrapers, 
emblazoned in neon with the names of multinationals. Down at street level, the 
shiny hauteur gives way to an anarchy of dust and rubbish and food stalls and 
stinking slums - but the slums aren't sultry ponds of lifelessness, they're 
frenzies of industry. It is a bewilderment of enterprise - clothing sweat shops 
crammed in next to computer shops, then a jewellery emporium next door to a 
store selling safes - and the traffic is a judder of gridlock and mayhem, 
steered by drivers in face masks, cheeks smudged with oily pollution.

Bangkok lies along a river, and from 6am this takes on the appearance of the 
M25. The water churns with boats ferrying the city to work, and office girls in 
short skirts, old women with groceries, young monks and startled tourists all 
leap as the vessels come careering on and off the landings, navigated by 
nothing more than a man on the bow whistling instructions to a driver who can't 
see a thing. There is a glorious and universal disregard for order - it is as 
if there are no rules as long as you're making money, and as if the entire city 
is on speed.

Which isn't too far from the truth. Amphetamines are abundant in Thailand, as 
is political corruption; the latest scandal to emerge during our stay were 
photographs of the prime minister with one of the country's leading dealers in 
speed pills. If a spirit of enterprising lawlessness accounted for Thailand's 
manic growth before the tiger crash of 1997, it is making a more orderly 
recovery difficult, and the city is tangled in poverty and confusions of 
desires. You can't move for temples or monks, and devotion to the King is 
extravagantly traditional - but after a rush of first-world wealth, Bangkok's 
profit impulse is so strong you can almost taste it in the air. And to judge 
from the tipsy grins that spread across the tourists' faces as they pile off 
the planes, it rather looks as if they have.

"You've just got to be hard," the woman in the hotel foyer informed us through 
pinched lips. She'd arrived from Yorkshire with her husband that morning, and 
straight off they'd gone shopping. She showed off her fake Prada handbags with 
grim satisfaction, while her husband talked us through the details of their 
haggling strategy like an angler reliving how he landed a shark. They'd not 
slept yet, but they'd been straight to the market; other activities on their 
itinerary were to get suits hand made by one of Bangkok's million tailors, and 
to bag some cheap jewellery. They'd dropped by the King's Palace ("very 
interesting") but not stayed long; they'd like to have seen some temples, of 
course, but time was short, what with all the shopping to be done.

They had also found time to have a look at Patpong, Bangkok's red light 
district, home of the internationally renowned ping-pong shows. If there is one 
thing even cheaper in Bangkok than a tailor-made suit, it's sex, and the 
streets around Patpong are clogged with tour buses depositing middle-aged 
tourists curious to go and see go-go girls eject ping-pong balls from their 
vaginas. It is an odd phenomenon. Thais may be in a state of some confusion 
about their morality, and their dual enthusiasms for Buddhism and vice may be 
puzzling. But Thais have nothing on the Western tourists who'd turn the telly 
over if EastEnders got too steamy back home, but who flock cheerfully to 
Patpong for a cocktail and a Kodak moment.

To the north of Patpong and the grand tourist hotels lies the Khao San Road, 
where the backpackers of South East Asia congregate, and their numbers have 
swelled to such an extent now that the Khao San Road itself has become a kind 
of sightseeing attraction for tourists. What was a cheap and cheerful dusty 
strip of budget hotels has ballooned into a rowdy clamour of shops and bars 
servicing the backpacker economy. So there are rucksack stores and sarong 
trolleys and a thousand internet cafés and travel agents and women braiding 
hair, and the travellers heading out of Thailand casually flaunt their tans and 
their confidence at the nervier, whiter new arrivals, who can soon be spotted 
anxiously buying up the traveller uniform of sarongs and sandals.

They come from all over the world, and the conversations in the cafés are all 
about how cheaply they're hoping they can live when they get south to the 
islands. Travellers like to consider themselves a different breed to tourists, 
but they are alike in at least one respect. The new backpack arrivals can't 
contain their excitement either, at the thought of how little money they're 
going to have to spend.

And the Thais, of course, can't contain their excitement at how much money 
they're going to get out of all these Westerners. Until relatively recently, 
visitors to Thailand tended to be sex tourists or travellers, but the collapse 
of the Baht has encouraged everyone else in between to make their way here, and 
the impact of mass tourism on parts of the country has been sudden and dramatic.

Less than a decade ago, the island of Koh Samui was a backpacker's private 
idyll of empty white sands and simple beach huts, undeveloped and largely 
unheard of in an average branch of Thomas Cook. If Bangkok was a mildly 
suggestive byword for vice, Koh Samui was the very opposite, but backpackers in 
beach huts are notoriously unextravagant, and it hasn't taken the island very 
long to refashion itself into a more lucrative commodity. If couples from 
Yorkshire will suspend their normal behaviour and pay money to see a ping-pong 
show, it can't have been hard for Koh Samui to work out what Western men would 
pay for a fortnight of tropical sexual favours.

"Hello, welcome! Where you from! Come, come!" is the fetching shriek that 
follows every tourist who makes his way through Koh Samui's main resort, 
Chaweng. The strip that runs parallel to the coconut-lined beach is a concrete 
and neon row of bars, each one fronted by a collection of beautiful, nubile, 
glamourous young Thai women, all executing a convincing performance of 
uncontrollable romantic desire. "Come, come!" they beckon prettily, staying 
just the right side of insistence, thus ensuring that the effect is girlishly 
charming rather than sluttish. And come the men do, with faces full of wolfish 
delight at the joy of this amazing arrangement which lets them make believe 
that they are sexually appealing.

The system is straightforward enough. Every bar and club in Chaweng, with a 
tiny handful of exceptions, employs "bar girls". If you call them prostitutes, 
everyone looks shocked and slightly offended. It is their job to entice 
customers to the bar, and the bar will pay them a small cut of the price of 
every drink the customer buys. The girls swoon charmingly over the men, who can 
grope and fondle them, sit them on their lap, and bore them to tears with 
conversation; wisely, the girls have come up with an inventive deterrent to the 
latter by playing endless games of Kerplunk with them instead.

The men enjoy the happy fantasy that these women are not prostitutes at all. 
That said, of course, if any of the men would like to take a girl off and have 
sex with her, all he must do is pay the bar about £4, and take her away. He 
then agrees a price with the girl for sex - but a more popular arrangement is 
not a one-off transaction but instead the beginning of what the men laughably 
refer to as a "relationship". For the duration of his holiday, the girl becomes 
his "girlfriend".

And so Chaweng is a resort town full of largely fat and unattractive European 
men driving around on mopeds with beautiful young women on the back. They are 
not doing anything sordid, they will tell you, like paying a poor, third-world 
prostitute to have sex with them. They are having a relationship! They buy lots 
of things for their girlfriend, of course, and generously give her money "for 
her family", but it has nothing to do with money. And the men strut about, 
beaming like little boys at Christmas, effortlessly able to enjoy the delusion, 
and having the time of their lives.

There are a lot of men in Koh Samui. An astonishing number, actually, and the 
ones too embarrassed to enter into the "girlfriend" pretence during the day 
generally find themselves able to suspend disbelief by 3am, after 14 pints, so 
the clubs are full of alluring freelance girls dancing hopefully. Their stamina 
is prodigious, and their smile never fades, although many of them are assisted 
by small pills which the Thais call Yabba, a kind of nuclear amphetamine which, 
if smoked in silver foil, will keep you going forever.

There are other things to do on Koh Samui besides pay women for sex. There is 
elephant trekking, and diving, and there are waterfalls to visit, and temples 
to see, and all the bars show European football on TV, and the restaurants 
screen movies you can watch while you eat. If you didn't manage enough shopping 
in Bangkok, you can buy more fake designer watches and bags and clothes, and 
you can haggle to your heart's desire, bellowing and waving your arms about 
over a matter of 10 or 20 pence, and the Thais will accommodate all these 
activities smilingly. You can get so drunk you drive your moped smack into an 
old woman's kebab stall, and she will smile gracefully and wave it away as 
nothing as she inspects the damage. And you can do all of this at a cost so 
small, it makes you feel like a king.

What you cannot do, of course, is ever know that a smile on Koh Samui is real. 
The smiles on the faces of the Western men mauling bar girls are real enough - 
but even if you never grope a bar girl, never invest in a "girlfriend", never 
crash your moped into an old woman, never scream at a shopkeeper over 20 pence, 
you would have to be supremely thoughtless or arrogant to assume that the Thai 
smiling at you is smiling because he or she likes you and not your traveller's 
cheques.

People come to Thailand because it makes them feel rich - and, just like rich 
people, most of them behave badly. But, also like rich people, they can never 
trust the motives of others' friendliness. This doesn't appear to bother too 
many Westerners here, it must be said. But if you don't care to feel like a 
whore's client for a fortnight, you might come to find it bothers you a lot.

The practicals

British Airways (0345 222111), Qantas (0345 747767) and THAI (020 74999113) 
fly direct to Bangkok from London. Expect to pay around £500 for a direct 
flight. Cheaper flights mat be available through a consolidator, such as 
Trailfinders (020 79383366), Quest Worldwide(020 8547 3322) or Bridge the World 
(020 79110900). There are 14 flights a day from Bangkok to Koh Samui with 
Bangkok Airways - buy tickets from teh airport on 00 66 425029 for around £50. 
More info fromwww.tourismthailand.org <http://www.tourismthailand.org>
 