
The extraordinary triumph of the neuroscientists in California who have wired 
up a paralysed man’s brain so that his impulses to move cancontrol a robot arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/21/brain-implant-controls-robotic-arm-with-the-power-of-thought>
 deserves a toast – and not just the drink that Erik Sorto can now raise 
unaided to his lips for the first time in 13 years. It also shows the 
importance of research on higher primates. Without detailed preliminary studies 
on monkeys, whose brains in important respects resemble our own, this kind of 
transformative treatment could never have been attempted.

Yet there is a determined pushback against all research on primates, which 
earlier this month drove one of Germany’s leading scientists out of the field. 
The prominent researcher Nikos Logothetis decidedto abandon his work 
<http://news.sciencemag.org/europe/2015/05/embattled-max-planck-neuroscientist-quits-primate-research>
 on macaques after a campaign against his work in Germany involving threats to 
him, his co-workers and their families. Logothetis’s experiments have 
established very clearly that the cloudy if colourful images shown by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans – which are the “brain 
scans” of popular science – actually correspond to the firing of individual 
neurons. This looks obvious, but it’s not in fact at all easy to prove; fMRI is 
necessarily coarse in its resolution of brain activity. There are something 
like 86bn neurons in the human brain, and in the interesting parts they are 
very closely packed together, so a precise determination of which does what 
requires a precision that fMRI just can’t deliver. The electrode patches used 
on Erik Sorto are only 4mm square.

No place for animal experiments that cross the line | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/28/no-place-for-animal-experiments-cross-line>
Partly owing to Logothetis’s work, we now know that the recognition of faces, 
which is important in social primates like ourselves and macaques, does 
sometimes involve the firing of single, specific neurons which have been 
trained to recognise particular faces, whether of people or monkeys. This is 
work that could only have been done using brain surgery to implant the 
electrodes which measure neuronal activity, and only on primates, whose social 
system is largely based on visual cues. Other social animals like dogs or rats 
can recognise one another as individuals, but seem to do so by smell rather 
than sight. But face processing is done in human brains in very similar ways to 
those in which it has evolved in macaques. So here is a specific and valuable 
advance in knowledge that could only have been attained by experimentation on 
animals that closely resemble us; experiments which are, as far as we can tell, 
almost painless.

Yet Logothetis has been driven from his primate lab. This is reminiscent of 
the prolonged campaign against Huntingdon Life Sciences in this country. In 
both cases the opponents of all animal experimentation gain their ends by 
frightening anyone less passionately intense. We must resist them. On 3 June 
the EU will review itshumane rules 
<http://www.nature.com/news/challenging-times-1.17521> on animal experiments. 
They should not be changed. This is not a fight between intellect and emotion, 
or reason and feeling, but between two modes of feeling and in the end 
compassion for humans, and that urge to understand which seems uniquely human 
should triumph over sentimentality and fear.
 