
Four years ago, after two devastating civil wars, South Sudan won its 
independence from Khartoum. It is now discovering that building a new country 
is just as hard as creating one. Quarrelling political leaders sparked a 
paroxysm of violence, which they continue to stoke. More than50,000 people have 
been killed 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/50000-and-not-counting-south-sudans-war-dead>
andmillions <http://www.unhcr.org/559bdb0e6.html> have fled. The escalating 
brutality, including atrocities such as the slaughter of unborn children and 
the castration of young boys, is a warning that worse may lie ahead.

'I'm tired of lo​​sing my people': South Sudan's refugees on four years of 
independence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/09/south-sudan-refugees-four-year-independence-anniversary>
Most international voices have not got beyond the pious but less than useful 
sentiment “Why can’t they all just get along?” What little attentionSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> has so far received has been 
shaped by humanitarians and addressed to symptoms not causes. Having played an 
integral role in the inception of the new state, the west – now sanctioning a 
few commanders and debating an arms embargo – struggles to find a remedy.

That state was misconceived. The people of South Sudan remain deeply troubled 
by their constitution. The army swelled, without unified command, and the 
ruling party remained unreformed from the days of revolution. It had little to 
offer the people. Society is now bitterly divided, even between communities 
still at peace. Yet there is a deep yearning for national dialogue, expressed 
by the churches, elders, women’s groups, thinktanks and even apparatchiks.

In this atmosphere, every incitement is more deadly and every act of moral 
courage more precious. The main peace process, directed by a regional group, 
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, has never begun to properly 
address South Sudan’s predicament.

The fragmented nature of the country is especially unsuited to a top-down 
approach. And South Sudan’s neighbours are especially unsuited to administer 
it. Uganda and Sudan, in particular, must be persuaded to draw back and allow 
South Sudan a life of its own.External mediation would be best led by an 
eminent African mandated by the UN.

The UN has saved tens of thousands of lives by offering sanctuary to people 
fleeing persecution, but has yet to find a moral voice and a political 
strategy. As for theAfrican Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion>, it commissioned, and then 
buried, an inquiry into atrocities. The truth must be published for the 
country to move forward. But it would be wise not to paint anyone into a 
corner. President Salva Kiir and rebel leader Riek Machar must instead be 
persuaded that they have a last opportunity to shape their legacy. And the 
country must draw the right lessons about the nature of political competition 
and how to accommodate it.

The shortcomings of the liberation movement cast a long shadow. It can only 
be escaped through a political opening. Given the chance, the people of South 
Sudan could provide that opening by embarking on a truly serious conversation 
on the country’s political future. After all the international incantation 
about “capacity”, some South Sudanese have learned to talk themselves down.

In truth, their capability has not been fathomed. If space could be created 
for internal mediation, the churches and others would rise to the occasion. 
South Sudan’s state will be brutal and weak or it will be inclusive and strong. 
It is time to say, in the words of Isaiah: “Come, let us reason the matter 
together.”
 