
What could possibly link an ultra-luxury spa hotel on the Aegean Sea in 
Greece, the most violent criminal gang in Russia’s living memory, and a web of 
prosecutors in the country, leading right up to the family of the general 
prosecutor?

According to the latest investigation by Russia’s anti-corruption campaigner, 
Alexei Navalny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, and his 
team, the sons of the country’s general prosecutor, Yuri Chaika, have amassed a 
huge business empire, thanks at least in part to their father’s position and 
their ability to keep regional prosecutors onside.

It also alleges that the sons’ business associates have ties to the Tsapok 
gang, which terrorised the town of Kushchevskaya in southernRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> until arrests were made following a 
massacre that shocked the country.

Navalny’s 45-minute video begins with a five-star hotel in Halkidiki, Greece. 
The hotel’s lavish opening featured a speech by Russia’s culture minister, 
Vladimir Medinsky, and performances by leading Russian pop stars.

Navalny’s researchers discovered that the owners of the hotel were Artem 
Chaika and Olga Lopatina, the former wife of Gennady Lopatin, the deputy 
prosecutor general and Yuri Chaika’s number two.

Navalny has made a habit of uncovering the undeclared property, suspicious 
foreign assets and criminal links of Russian elites, usually to a stony wall of 
silence as an official reaction, but the Chaika video is the most damning yet, 
if the allegations are all true. Chaika’s other son, Igor, is also accused of 
using his family connections to build a huge business, and of benefiting from 
apparently rigged state auctions.

Navalny said his team first uncovered the Chaika story when they were doing 
their regular monitoring of property purchases in territories where Russian 
officials like to stash their money – Greece, Cyprus, Spain and London. They 
noticed the lavish Greek hotel opening and the Chaika connection.

“We put it to one side for a while, because really there’s nothing all that 
surprising in our officials having dubious property. But then, when the Tsapok 
links appeared, I couldn’t believe it initially.

“We checked it and checked it, and it just got worse and worse,” he told the 
Observer.

Navalny’s anti-corruption foundation found company records showing Lopatina 
was one of the joint owners of a sugar business with Anzhela Tsapok, the wife 
of Sergei Tsapok, who died in prison last year. He had been given a life 
sentence for one of the worst crimes in recent Russian history.

Even in Russia, in which the crime pages of newspapers are often filled with 
gruesome deeds, the Kushchevskaya massacre resonated for its sheer brutality. 
Twelve people were killed, including four children, mainly by stabbing or 
strangulation, and then the house was set on fire with the bodies inside. The 
ensuing investigation uncovered a chain of killings, kidnappings, rape and 
corruption. Tsapok, who had formerly been a local politician, was named the 
gang leader and sentenced to life in prison, while his mother was given three 
years in prison for fraud.

The prosecutors in the case at the time said Tsapok’s gang had its tentacles 
all over the town, with local police on the payroll. Tsapok himself was a 
member of the pro-Kremlin United Russia party and a member of the local 
parliament.

The gang controlled all local business, and were also accused of picking young 
women at random off the street, raping them and then keeping them silent with 
threats. They were accused of 19 deaths over a decade, including the 12 which 
brought Moscow police to the town and finally uncovered the chain of 
wrongdoings that local police had been unable or unwilling to prosecute.

Navalny’s film includes documents which appear to show that earlier cases 
against the Tsapok gang were dropped after interference from local prosecutors. 
Navalny’s video has received more than 3 million views on YouTube in the week 
since it was launched, but the official reaction has been muted.

Vladimir Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said the allegations “did not 
provoke our interest” because they were not related to the general prosecutor 
but to his sons, who have their own business activities.

Chaika himself, in his only comments on the video, told Interfax on 3 December 
that the video was “a hatchet job, not paid for by those who made it”, hinting 
that some outside power was attempting to smear him. “The information presented 
is deliberately falsified and has no basis in fact,” he said.

Prime minister Dmitry Medvedev was asked about the allegations during an 
annual interview with Russian journalists last week, and became angry, 
suggesting that tabling the accusations was risking a return to Stalin-era 
repression. “You said a certain person has been accused. If we’re going to 
operate in such a way, we’ll be going back a long way — back to the 1930s. Only 
law enforcement can lodge accusations,” he said.

The influential business daily Vedomosti wrote an editorial calling on the 
government to investigate the allegations seriously. “The materials that were 
published need to be confirmed, but they are not baseless – the investigation 
is well documented,” the paper wrote. “In a normal country, these kinds of 
public accusations should be publicly dealt with, and not just by the people 
involved but by their superiors.”

Navalny said the authorities were in a difficult position, as they did not 
want to be seen to be reacting to any of his investigations. He isalso an 
opposition politician 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/17/putin-is-destroying-russia-why-base-his-regime-on-corruption-asks-navalny>
 and a trenchant Kremlin critic. He has faced a number of court cases and his 
brother has been jailed, in what has been described as an attempt to put 
pressure on him.

“There will not be any investigation here, but the Latvian authorities have 
already started one on money laundering and we want the Swiss authorities to 
start one too. We want to make the cost of keeping Chaika very high for the 
Kremlin,” Navalny said.
 