 Antonio Carluccio was born in 1937 on the Amalfi coast, the son of a station 
master, and moved to Britain in 1975. He was runner-up in the 1985 Sunday Times 
cook of the year competition, and now owns the Neal Street Restaurant and 
Carluccio's Caff in London. He has had his own TV series and written books, 
most recently Antonio Carluccio's Vegetables. He is married and lives in London 
and Hampshire.
 What is your idea of perfect happiness? 
 A plate of steaming risotto topped with freshly-shaven white truffle. 

 What is your greatest fear? 
 Ignorance and hypocrisy, the cause of most conflicts. 

 With which historical figure do you most identify? 
 Guglielmo Marconi, the founder of instant communication. 

 Which living person do you most admire? 
 Gorbachev, unsung hero - he single-handedly scrapped communism. 

 What has been your most embarrassing moment? 
 Saying to Her Royal Highness, Princess Margaret, that I knew her brother, 
meaning His Royal Highness, Prince of Wales. She was highly amused.

 What is your greatest extravagance? 
 Buying one kilo of Beluga Caviar. 

 What objects do you always carry? 
 Swiss army knife and a Ronson lighter. 

 What makes you depressed? 
 The inability of humans to discover that they are destroying themselves. 

 What is your favourite smell? 
 White truffles, roses, fresh-baked bread. 

 What is your favourite building? 
 An igloo is the perfect house. 

 What is your favourite journey? 
 To the woods in search of funghi. 

 Should the Royal Family be scrapped? 
 What is the alternative? 

 What or who is the greatest love of your life? 
 My dog, Jan, who delighted 13 years of my life. 

 Which person do you most despise? 
 Drug and arms dealers because they're the lowest in the scale of morality. 

 What is your greatest regret? 
 To have given up active sport too early. 

 When and where were you happiest? 
 My childhood spent in Italy, living in a railway station. 

 What single thing would improve the quality of your life? 
 An English butler. 

 What would your motto be? 
 Live a good life without harm to oneself or to others. 

 What keeps you awake at night? 
 Full moon and writing books. 

 What is the most important lesson life has taught you? 
 If you want to be successful you have to work at it.
 