
1. You don't have much time to impress someone so keep it snappy. Make use of 
those short films and videos you made at university or college and put together 
a show reel of your best work. Companies will not want to watch your student 
version of Lord of the Rings but are happy to view a few minutes of your best 
stuff. A short clip is more than enough to give potential employers an idea of 
your skills and imagination.

2. Know your audience. Don't send production people DVDs — no one will play 
them. You want to make it as easy as possible for your work to be viewed and 
websites such asYouTube <http://www.youtube.com/> and Vimeo <http://vimeo.com/> 
are great for this. Just don't forget the URL when writing to companies and 
make sure the link is in a prominent place on your CV.

3. Have a passion for the topic as well as for TV. Target the companies of the 
programmes you really love, and enjoy watching — if the content of the 
programmes is indeed close to your heart, it will be much easier to convince 
someone they should hire you. But it's not just about telling them you've got 
passion, show how you've used it outside of your career. For example, want to 
work for a production company that make a lot of cookery shows? Take a cookery 
course. Want to work in comedy? Get some bar-work in a comedy club. Anything 
which shows you as committed to the subject will help you stand out.

4. Market yourself. Yes, everyone's doing it but that's no reason not to try 
and make your voice heard before you even get to interview. Its easy to set up 
your own webpage these days so use one to create a blog and give constructive 
feedback on what you like and don't like about the current output on TV. Use
Twitter <http://twitter.com/> and Linked In <http://www.linkedin.com/nhome/> to 
start conversations with those in the sector, be self-promoting and direct them 
towards you work (see point 2).

5. Heard the one about the guy who doorstopped a commissioning editor...? No? 
That's because it's a bad idea. Whilst you might think finding the home address 
of a producer and hanging around outside waiting to confront him with your 
wonderful idea shows initiative, in fact it's been done many, many times 
before. No one likes to be confronted like this no matter how charming you 
think you might be. If you're set on doing some guerilla marketing, find out 
who works in his or her team — someone lower down the pecking order might be 
more receptive to this approach.

6. Be prepared to work extremely hard. You might be the next Martin Scorsese 
but for now accept that you're probably only going to get a job as a runner. 
Everyone has to start at the bottom so make the most of it, build contacts, 
charm colleagues and perfect your tea making skills. This might seem like 
menial stuff but filming on location can be tough. You're working to extremely 
tight deadlines, it's long hours and your social life will be curtailed, if you 
can put up with this and still make tea with a smile you're the sort of person 
the crew will want back. And maybe this time they'll listen to your idea for 
The Godfather IV.

Joe Mahoney is Managing Director of ProductionBase  
<http://www.productionbase.co.uk/>
 