
Prepare to flatter and impress: read up on your interviewer

If you have been called for an interview, do your homework; not just about the 
job, but the people. All scientists love to talk about their own research. Get 
a grasp on what they have done and what they are currently involved in and ask 
questions. This shows that you are genuinely interested and have a broad 
knowledge — all very convincing to an interviewer.

Develop your scientific writing skills — and go easy on the big words!

The benefit of writing, whether a research paper or magazine article, is that 
these published pieces can be listed as achievements on your CV, and even 
brought to an interview. If you want to follow a career in science, you will 
end up writing a lot of reports and papers, sometimes for readers who are not 
experts in the field. We know you're all extremely clever but don't make the 
mistake of blinding with science. The real skill is being able to communicate 
the complexities of science in a simple, concise and understandable fashion. If 
one of my team tells me they are stuck writing something, I just ask what they 
are trying to say. Usually they then explain it to me, clearly and simply. Job 
done — write it down. I realised the importance of writing well early in my 
career. My supervisor went through my first research paper and immediately 
erased all unnecessary words. The text was butchered but instantly better. It 
was a hard lesson and I never forgot it.

Get together with fellow science geeks: join relevant societies

In microbiology, for instance, there are two excellent societies (Society for 
Applied Microbiology, Society for General Microbiology). Apart from networking 
opportunities at their conferences, their magazines update you on current 
issues in microbiology, jobs, research awards, grants, and so. Such societies 
may also have initiative to help graduates or young scientists. The editors 
might even welcome articles about job hunting or your first jobs. Plus you'll 
get plenty of chance to talk shop with fellow science enthusiasts in your field.

Force yourself to do presentations

We can't all be as beloved a media figure as physicist Professor Brian Cox, 
but if you are involved in research, you need to be visible in whatever field 
you are working in. Presentations at conferences and symposia are a good way to 
do this, even as an undergraduate. I was terrified starting out. My first major 
talk was at a conference in Norway, where I presented my research on the 
influence of spatial separation on bacterial colony inhibition. "Propinquity" 
was how we described this. As some of the audience might not be familiar with 
the term, I copied the dictionary page of the definition to make a slide. 
Launching into my talk, I turned to the slide and read out the first word — 
"Condom'". I froze. The dictionary page had started in the middle of the 
definition for 'prophylaxis'.

The 'condom lecture' — as it has since been known — at least had the benefit 
of making me realise that if the audience is laughing, they must be paying 
attention and perhaps even enjoying themselves. And they are not going to 
crucify someone who is obviously young, nervous and inexperienced. Probably. 
You improve with every talk you give, so force yourselves to do them. Yes, it 
can be listed on a CV, but it also gets you noticed. Watch and learn from other 
people; who did you enjoy listening to? Why? Who is your audience abd what is 
their background? If you are interested in what you do — show it. It is so much 
better to listen to people who show their enthusiasm.

As for the "any questions" bit at the end — I hate to say it but this can be 
the worse part. Just be honest if you don't know something ("I'll find that out 
and get back to you") — and compliment them on a good question.
 