
Alexandra Hidalgo had no idea the price she would pay for her freedom when she 
divorced her husband five years ago.

One night after leaving work Alexandra was kidnapped at gunpoint by a group of 
6 masked men, and raped for over seven hours.

Among the men was her former husband, Ivan Sosa Rivero—a lieutenant-colonel in 
the Venezuelan army.

"I thought that it was going to be like when other couples got divorced, the 
father spends the weekend with the children, the mother works and the following 
weekend it's her turn to have the children," Alexandra said in a testimony 
taken by Amnesty International.

"I never imagined what did actually happen… my kidnapping, my being raped by 
six, seven people. I don't even know how many of them raped me because I was 
raped repeatedly and there was a moment when neither my soul nor my body could 
take anymore…"

Rivero was charged with kidnapping, rape and vehicle theft. But only four 
months after being held in provisional custody at a military prison, he was 
released. He has since gone into hiding. Only two of Alexandra's attackers have 
been sentenced. Two others were acquitted. Another has not been found.

Since the ruling Alexandra has refused to back down. Through demonstrations, 
media appearances, and an international petition published by Amnesty 
International, she has tirelessly called for justice and the rights of women in 
her country to be recognized.

In Venezuela, up to five women are murdered by their husbands, partners, or 
ex-partners every week. The number of women that have reported domestic abuse 
to the Public Prosecutors Office has tripled since 2007, but there has not been 
a single prosecution.

Since Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez assumed power 10 years ago, his 
administration has championed the importance of women's rights. But all too 
often the rhetoric fails to meet the reality.

In 2007, the Organic Law for Women to a Life free from Violence was introduced 
in an effort to tackle the worst abuses facing Venezuelan women. It recognizes 
up to 19 forms of gender violence.

The law has been hailed as "a positive step" by Nuria Garcia from Amnesty 
International, but it is only the first on a long journey.

"The problem we've got is [the law] has not been fully implemented," says 
Garcia. "There hasn't been enough training of prosecutors so they know how to 
implement the law, and how to prosecute the cases."

Judges and lawyers are not the only ones lacking proper training. Women that 
go to the police say they are discouraged from reporting cases of abuse, 
because domestic violence is treated as a private matter.

"One of the things that stopped me filing a complaint was… [the police] did 
not want to accept it. [They said] it was a problem between husband and wife," 
a woman told Amnesty International under conditions of anonymity.

"The law states that police officers responsible for taking complaints should 
be trained so they know how to deal with these complaints, but there hasn't 
been such training," says Garcia.

According to local NGOs, only 10 per cent of women report cases of domestic 
violence. Many of these women live with their abusers and are discouraged from 
taking action against them, because in Venezuela, there is simply nowhere for 
them to go.

In a country of over 14 million women, there are only two women's shelters. 

The government legally recognizes the need for a shelter in every state, but 
in the last decade the Chavez administration has not built a single new 
shelter. Meanwhile, the sheer volume of women that flock to the doors of the 
Caracas and Aragua shelters are forcing them into a near state of collapse.

In 2006 the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) partnered with local 
NGOs, UNICEF, and the government institute for women, INAMUJER, to create a 
public awareness advert aimed at addressing the roots of domestic violence.

The campaign "La Cuenta Tres" was targeted at Venezuelan men, emphasizing the 
suffering inflicted on the families of men who abuse their partners.

UNDP representative Eduardo Fuenmayor says the results of the campaign showed 
little variation in men's behavior. But Fuenmayor attributes the low level of 
impact on the fact that, "after all the denunciations, there is still not one 
person in jail for crimes related to gender-based violence."

"If you have impunity, whatever you do…campaigns are worthless," he says.

The UNDP is in the process of starting a new project focused on adolescents. 
However, Fuenmayor is worried that the campaign might provoke frustration if 
the judicial system is not improved.

"Campaigns can just support what you are already doing in the spaces that you 
need to do it, because otherwise you create expectations, and then you create 
frustration if you do not respond to that expectation," he says.

A major obstacle in the way of NGOs' work is a lack of access to data. There 
is an appalling shortage of statistics on gender violence, and according to 
women's rights groups, the information that does exist is not made public.

"The governmental data is hidden and we know [some information] only from the 
press," says Professor Ofelia Alvarez, the head of the leading Venezuelan 
women's rights organization Fundamujer.

"In the country there is not exactly said statistics" she adds. "That is to 
say, there are no governmental, judicial or police statistics of more than 
between two and four thousand people at least. That is the great problem."

Limited access to information makes it difficult to raise awareness about the 
extent of the problem and improve measures for tackling domestic violence.

"We need more awareness that these cases exist, so that when people see 
someone experiencing this kind of violence they hold out a hand…" explains one 
victim of abuse.

"At times we feel rejected, we feel that if we go and talk to an official they 
are going to blame us for allowing it to happen," she says. "They shouldn't see 
us as abused women, but as human beings."

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 