
Kate Arthurs, the British Council <http://www.britishcouncil.org/arts>

Three key issues we must address
First, how can we support artists and organisations to articulate clearly what 
it is they have to offer? What is their unique and compelling vision? What 
value do they bring for audiences, partners, artists and communities?

Second, how can we foster deeper collaboration? This includes but is not 
limited to artistic collaboration. Rather it’s about how organisations can work 
together and how one organisation can contribute to other partner or funder 
agendas, while staying true to their own purpose. Finally, how can we support 
organisations and artists to develop mixed and sustainable funding models so 
that when funding patterns inevitably shift, they can still thrive?

Dominic Haddock, OperaUpClose <http://www.operaupclose.com/>

Audiences should have more of a say
We need to get better at talking and listening to audiences: inviting them to 
tell us what they think, whether that be in person or in writing. We also need 
to empower and encourage our audiences to have their say outside of 
conversations with us, to tell anyone who’ll listen – from their neighbour to a 
politician – what they think of the arts. The more debate the better.

Webchat takeaways


 * From loan financing and crowdfunding, there are lots of great new funding 
opportunities out there, but they should be complimentary to traditional 
funding. They must not replace grant funding from Arts Council England or local 
authorities.

 * Good arts provision in schools must be protected in order to sustain the 
future of the creative industries (and just plain creativity).

 * Large-scale organisations must continue to support smaller and younger 
companies, and individual artists.

 * Experienced professionals should give time to mentor and help develop young 
artists and arts professionals who are trying to break into the industry.

 * Members of the public who feel passionately about the arts must tell their 
local MPs, local authorities (and anyone else who will listen) how and why the 
arts are important to them. Yes, the industry must listen to audiences and 
continue to engage local and national government, but we need the public’s 
support. 
Sarah Thirtle, Creative Industry Finance 
<https://www.creativeindustryfinance.org.uk/>

Versatility will be key
The word “resilient” is used often and is indeed apt, but there is also an 
argument to suggest that organisations and businesses could benefit from being 
fleet-of-foot and versatile. Opportunities can present themselves in many forms 
and being able to grasp them is paramount.

One example is being able to clearly articulate your organisation’s offer and 
outcomes. When accessing finance, a well-designed businesses plan is really 
useful. It allows lenders to quickly see the purpose, objectives and ambitions 
of a company. Using the finance to shore up ongoing work and invest in new 
talent, markets or technology is vital.


But it works both ways. Some finance providers could do more to fully 
understand the inherent value, artistic excellence and brilliant competencies 
of our country’s creative businesses and organisations.

What does the sector need beyond money?
We’ve noticed a number of areas that come up again and again that our 
supported businesses tell us they need finance for and/or support with. 
Commercial enterprises, for example, are telling us they need working capital 
to help them meet their already growing demand. They also need advice on how 
best to price themselves in the market, and routes to new markets.

Traditionally grant-funded organisations tell us they need support and advice 
on their new or current income diversification plans, to help them confidently 
present their financial projections to manage growth and the repayment of 
loans. We do also learn from our supported businesses about their experiences 
of writing business plans. Often the ideas and thinking are there, but it’s 
confidence that’s needed to recognise these as good and viable.

 Then there’s the help that’s needed to structure all of this into 
documentation. One of our advisors recently said that she finds it useful to 
ask them to think of it more like designing a business, rather than writing a 
business plan.

Mehjabeen Price, Creative England <http://www.creativeengland.co.uk/>

Addressing the London/regional funding imbalance
How can we ensure the regions outside London get their fair share of 
investment in the arts? By constantly making the case for the wealth of talent 
that exists outside of London. The arts and the creative industries are key to 
UK growth and prosperity. Both the sector and the country at large would 
benefit greatly if investment into this sector is not just focused on London.

There are numerous creative centres that already exist across the country. We 
should be celebrating them. By further developing these, rather than continuing 
to focus on the capital, we can bring more diversity and dynamism to make 
Britain the leader in this field.

Don’t forget the creative industries
The creative industries generate nearly £72bn annually and are growing at a 
rate of more than 9%. Though politicians and policy-makers band around these 
figures, they don’t really believe these businesses are the new drivers of 
growth. The creative industries are the new “manufacturing sector” and to 
ensure its future, policy-makers need to treat it as an industry and have an 
industrial strategy for it.

Phil Gibby, Arts Council England <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>

Marketing and development teams should work together
To maximise the potential of individual giving, we need to understand that our 
audiences and donors are broadly the same marketplace. It’s astonishing that 
there are still many organisations that run separate marketing and development 
departments, when there are so many potential synergies in terms of building 
those long-term relationships.

William Wollen, actor, writer and director


We need to find our political champions 
We’re short of them at the moment and understandably so. It’s a brave 
politician who will shout about the arts in difficult times. We need to find 
them on both sides of the political divide. As Lord Attenborough said: “The 
arts are not a luxury.” If that’s the case then we need to have decent public 
funding to support an artistic (not a bureaucratic) infrastructure.

Our theatres, galleries, auditoria and so on should be safe. Not preserved in 
aspic, but a statutory responsibility for our local authorities.

OperaUpClose is a recipient of Creative Industry Finance support 
<https://www.creativeindustryfinance.org.uk/>, a programme managed by Creative 
United <http://www.creativeunited.org.uk/> and publicly funded by Arts Council 
England

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 