
Mama died in June. I remember because it was warm on the bus back from the 
hospital. I looked out of the window and couldn’t believe people were walking 
around as if nothing had happened. How did they do it? They must have lost 
people they’d loved, at some point, especially the older ones. I couldn’t see 
how I would ever be right again. I actually felt my heart break when the doctor 
told me that Mama, my grandmother, was about to die. It’s one of those stupid 
phrases people use all the time, but you have no idea until it happens to you, 
until your insides dissolve into a well of grief.

She was 54. I was 19. Mum was 36. Mama was young when she had my mum, and my 
mum was young when she had me. Mama brought me up. When she died I took my 
grief out on my mother – and told her that I wished she’d died instead.

Soon afterwards, my flat was burgled. That’s life. They took my computer and 
my sense of safety so I moved in with Louai, a friend I knew from work, and his 
mum Janet and brother Adnan. Janet had moved to Saudi Arabia in the 1980s and 
had only just returned to the UK following the break up of her marriage. The 
lads were, ostensibly, Muslim, but they didn’t seem to mind me being “gay”, or 
“dressing up” as a girl at the weekends. They welcomed me in when my own family 
didn’t.

Mama’s death made me see how short life is and I knew I couldn’t go on living 
as a boy. It was time to get rid of the last of my male clothes, before heading 
off to university in Brighton in October. I’d turned to sex work to pay the 
rent and attempted to hide my transgender status from my new friends on the 
course. I soon became depressed and isolated.

My mum didn’t invite me home for Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> that year because she was 
ashamed of me wearing girl’s clothes and didn’t want my stepfather’s family to 
see me wearing makeup. I hadn’t spoken to my actual father for years.

I asked my auntie if I could join her and her dad (Mama had remarried after 
having my mum, so he wasn’t my grandad, just plain old Terry) but he thought 
he’d feel “a bit awkward” around me too. He was fine when I finally went around 
a year or so later – as was everyone else in my family, including my mum who is 
now my biggest fan. But that Christmas I was on my own.

“Spend it with us!” said Janet, who was smart and kind and generous. She made 
a lovely meal, but she and the boys ended up having a huge argument. As Janet 
pointed out at the time, “You’re one of the family now, Paris, so I’m afraid 
that means you get to see us warts and all.” This was, indeed, strangely 
comforting. I remember me and Louai going for a walk that night though, and 
feeling really, really low.

I went to my sister’s house on Boxing Day. She had a cheese board from 
Sainsbury’s that I thought was dead posh and we were eating it when Daren 
turned up. I felt the anxiety kick in, the shakiness, the heart pounding. Hi 
Dad. Did you have a nice Christmas, he asks me. No, I say, it was horrible. Did 
you get any nice presents? No, I tell him, I haven’t seen anyone. You usually 
give people presents when you see them.

“You can’t expect the whole fucking world to bend over backwards for you and 
your sexuality, son!” he goes, in front of my sister and her daughter and her 
boyfriend. I wanted to cry. And kill him. For the record, my gender identity 
has nothing to do with my “sexuality”. Seeing yourself as a girl isn’t a sexual 
persuasion.

There are millions of people in this country who are suffering right now, 
forgotten by society and rejected by their families right at the time they need 
them most. As you grow up you learn that life isn’t a gravy advert, sadly. I 
have grown up a lot, these past few years, though. What a pity Mama isn’t 
around to see it.
 