
As a child I was minded to think that, as in fairy tales, hardships brought 
their reward, so I was content to accept my lot with passivity. My mother and I 
lived in distressed gentility in Edith Grove; my father had died when I was 
small, a source of puzzlement to me and regret to my mother, and we coexisted 
in proximity, if not closeness, as neither presumed to burden the other with 
the intensity of our profound emotions.

I was relieved when my mother met Simon. He was much older and held the 
assumptions of his generation, but he was kind and we could not have asked for 
more. He bought me a small flat, which gave me a modicum of independence, and 
my mother and he moved to his home in Nice.

Away from the confinement of my mother, I entered a relationship with Adam, a 
far freer spirit than that to which I was accustomed. I might have been 
saddened, if not jealous, at his affairs with other women had I been otherwise 
minded, but I grew to value the times he chose to share with me.

Adam was not to SimonÍs tastes; our visit to Nice was far from a success. I 
used to hear Simon listening at our door to see if Adam had crept into my bed, 
which, being of a hotter temperament, he invariably had. It was with a sense of 
relief on all sides that we returned to London, and my relationship with my 
mother reverted to a formal normality.

It was with some shock that I heard Simon had fallen and died. My mother had 
been so overcome that she had been taken to hospital for a sleep cure. I moved 
to Nice, where it was with some annoyance that I found Simon had been 
financially incautious and I was forced into more straightened circumstances.

My conversations with Dr Balbi led me to believe my mother was unlikely to 
recover, but I was obliged to continue my visits. Dr Balbi encouraged me to 
think he desired me but, despite 10 pages of intense introspection and 
repressed sexual longing followed by a raised eyebrow, he failed to make an 
advance.

Some months later I observed the formalities of my motherÍs death and found 
myself financially comfortable once more. Dr Balbi - dear Antoine - now spent 
the occasional night with me. We were not more open about our relationship for 
fear of upsetting his sister. One day I might even contemplate a life without 
him. How bold I have become.

And if you really are pressed, the digested read, digested:  More intense 
feelings valiantly repressed and cruel suffering nobly borne as another 
Brookner heroine lies back and thinks of Chelsea and Nice
 