
In the aftermath of the Sopa fight, as top Eurocrats are declaring the 
imminent demise ofActa <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta>, as the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership begins to founder, as the German Pirate party takes 
seats in a third German regional election, it's worth taking stock of "nerd 
politics" and see where we've been and where we're headed.

Since the earliest days of the information wars, people who care about freedom 
and technology have struggled with two ideological traps: nerd determinism and 
nerd fatalism. Both are dangerously attractive to people who love technology.

In "nerd determinism," technologists dismiss dangerous and stupid political, 
legal and regulatory proposals on the grounds that they are technologically 
infeasible. Geeks who care about privacy dismiss broad wiretapping laws, easy 
lawful interception standards, and other networked surveillance on the grounds 
thatthey themselves can evade this surveillance. For example, US and EU police 
agencies demand that network carriers include backdoors for criminal 
investigations, and geeks snort derisively and say that none of that will work 
on smart people who use good cryptography in their email and web sessions.

But, while it's true that geeks can get around this sort of thing – and other 
bad network policies, such as network-level censorship, or vendor locks on our 
tablets, phones, consoles, and computers – this isn't enough to protect us, let 
alone the world. It doesn't matter how good your email provider is, or how 
secure your messages are, if 95% of the people you correspond with use a free 
webmail service with a lawful interception backdoor, and if none of those 
people can figure out how to use crypto, then nearly all your email will be 
within reach of spooks and control-freaks and cops on fishing expeditions.

What's more, things that aren't legal don't attract monetary investment. In 
the UK, where it's legal to unlock your mobile phone, you can just walk into 
shops all over town and get your handset unlocked while you wait. When this was 
illegal in the US (it's marginally legal at the moment), only people who could 
navigate difficult-to-follow online instructions could unlock their phones. No 
merchant would pay to staff a phone-unlocking role at the corner shop (my 
dry-cleaner has someone sitting behind a card-table who'll unlock any phone you 
bring him for a fiver). Without customers, the people who make phone-unlocking 
tools will only polish them to the point where they're functional for their 
creators. The kind of polish that marks the difference between a tool and a 
product is often driven by investment, markets and commercialism.

That's not to say that some dedicated hacker won't polish the hell out of a 
semi-legal or illegal tool for the sheer satisfaction of a job well done, but 
those heavily polished gems are the exceptions. Leave aside the self-interest 
geeks should have in good technology rules – the fact that you, personally, 
can't start a business based on supplying the tools your less-savvy neighbours 
can use. Without self-revealing, easy-to-use tools, the benefits of technology 
are only extended to technologists. If you want a world where only the clued-in 
get to reap the benefits of technology, you are a technocrat, not a geek. 
What's more, as you age, and your ability to stay current on technical subjects 
is eroded, you will become a serf along with your poor neighbours.

"Nerd fatalism" is the cynical counterpart of "nerd determinism." Nerd 
fatalists hold that the geeky way of doing things – the famed "rough consensus 
and running code" – and have an ideological purity that can't be matched by the 
old-time notions of deliberation, constitutionalism, and politics. These things 
are inherently corrupt and corrupting. If you move to Whitehall to defend 
technology, in a few years, you will be indistinguishable from any other 
Whitehall wonk, just another corrupted suit who sells out his ideals for 
realpolitik.

It's true that politics has internal logic, and that habitual participants in 
politics are apt to adopt the view that politics is "the art of the possible" 
and no fit place for ideals. But there's an important truth about politics and 
law: even if you don't take an interest in them, it doesn't follow that they 
won't take an interest inyou.

So we can design clever, decentralised systems such as BitTorrent all day 
long, systems that appear to have no convenient entity to sue or arrest or 
legislate against. But if our inventions rattle enough cages and threaten 
enough bottom lines, the law will come hunting for them. The law will seek out 
arbitrary victims – think of how Sopa set out to prohibit hardening DNS against 
fraud and phishing because it would be convenient to use fake DNS entries to 
stop people from reaching ThePirate Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pirate-bay>. When it does, technology 
can't save them. The only defence against a legal attack is the law. If you 
don't have an organised body for someone else to sue, it means that there will 
be no organised body to mount a defence in court, either.

If people who understand technology don't claim positions that defend the 
positive uses of technology, if we don't operate within the realm of 
traditional power and politics, if we don't speak out for the rights of our 
technically unsophisticated friends and neighbours, then we will also be lost. 
Technology lets us organise and work together in new ways, and to build new 
kinds of institutions and groups, but these will always be in the wider world, 
not above it.
 