
As much as the Guardian is an internationalist newspaper, the thoughts of 
editorial staff have been focused a bit closer to home in recent weeks. The 
search for a new editor-in-chief to succeedAlan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> moved to the hustings stage 
on Wednesday 25 February in preparation for staff to vote on a list of four 
candidates in an indicative ballot that will guarantee the winner a place on 
the Scott Trust’s final shortlist of six for the role.

Three internal candidates and one former member of staff who is now a 
journalism professor in New York answered questions in front of more than 400 
journalists in the main hall at Kings Place, King’s Cross, home of the Guardian 
in London. It was filmed and will be available to all Guardian journalists 
around the world.

The meeting was organised by the National Union of Journalists, but all 
editorial staff will get a vote. Those eligible to vote are:
• All core Guardian/Observer staff journalists – including non-NUJ members.
• Freelances/casuals whose Guardian/Observer earnings are more than half their 
income.
• Overseas Guardian/Observer journalists including US and Australian 
journalists (ie locally hired colleagues as well as British secondments working 
in the US and Australia).
• Community coordinators, expected to be part of the union house agreement, 
and some others including moderators.

Last Wednesday the candidates were also keen to stress that print had a 
future, at least for the next few years

The four candidates at the hustings were: Emily Bell, director of the Tow 
Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University and a non-executive 
director of the Scott Trust, which owns the Guardian; Wolfgang Blau, Guardian 
News and Media’s director of digital strategy; Janine Gibson, editor-in-chief 
of theguardian.com; and Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of Guardian US. Each 
made a five-minute statement and then answered a set of prepared questions 
before an open question-and-answer session.

The concert hall, with its walls made from just one German oak tree and 
fabulous acoustics, was something of a contrast to the last time the hustings 
for an editor were held; then it was in a room above the Horseshoe pub a few 
hundred yards from the Guardian’s old Farringdon Road offices.

On that occasion scores of journalists crammed into the room to hear the four 
candidates – all men – including Alan Rusbridger. Then, all the candidates 
talked of the need to improve the prospects of women – and Rusbridger, 
immediately after his appointment, madeGeorgina Henry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/07/georgina-henry> his deputy. This 
time around three of the four on the stage were women. It is also interesting 
to note that many of the issues foreshadowed as being key by the candidates on 
23 January 1995 turned out to be as important as they predicted.

Apart from the role of women, the internet featured in the 1995 candidates’ 
ideas of the future. I am indebted to my predecessor, Ian Mayes, for the 
following from Rusbridger’s statement: “The old ink and paper Guardian isn’t 
about to disappear. But we should, in cooperation with the rest of the group, 
give serious attention to the need to develop electronically distributed 
versions of the paper.The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has already been left behind in 
this area by the Times and the Telegraph. We should be attempting to recover 
lost ground.”

Last Wednesday the candidates were also keen to stress that print had a 
future, at least for the next few years.

Rusbridger then also identified one of the strengths of the Guardian that has 
been emphasised in the development of the web: “I am glad that the paper’s main 
relationship is with its readers rather than with its proprietor. Guardian 
readers are, by and large, intelligent, perceptive and well-informed. They are 
exacting in the standards they demand of the paper. They expect, and deserve, 
something closer to a dialogue than a monologue. In return they will be 
extraordinarily loyal.”

It was in that spirit that 20 years later a handful of letter writers raised 
the issue of whether readers would have an opportunity to express an opinion 
about who should be the next editor of the Guardian. In aletter published in 
the paper on 26 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/25/we-need-wallchart-guardian-contenders>
, Richard Stainton from Whitstable wrote: “What plans are in place for a 
similar indicative ballot among readers? If nothing is yet planned, I’d suggest 
that each of the shortlisted candidates is required to write a letter to 
readers about how they would fulfil the role. These would then be published, 
anonymously, and readers invited to vote and/or comment. The Scott Trust would 
gather valuable feedback about how readers want the Guardian to develop; and 
the interview panel would be informed of readers’ priorities when making this 
vital appointment.”

Readers vote for the editor? Not this time perhaps, but next? And the readers’ 
editor too, I hear you cry.
 