October sunshine chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-03T09:41:09/embed.html>
October was a remarkably fine and dry month over the whole of the UK. As a 
result it seemed mild, but temperatures were actually close to average. The 
settled conditions were caused by a blocked pattern in the atmosphere in which 
the “normal” westerly winds were held at bay by a blocking high pressure system 
that lingered for much of the month. This pattern has characterised recent 
Octobers. Due to the high frequency of easterly winds, the north and west was 
favoured for sunshine and dryness, in contrast to recent months.

Temperatures


The average Central England temperature was 0.2C above the 1981-2010 average, 
although such has been the warming in recent decades that it was around one 
degree warmer than the historic average from 1659. In Scotland, the anomaly was 
+1.4C, mainly due to warm days in north-west Scotland. This warmth was 
particularly noticeable in the first week in south-easterly winds, though 
nights were cold at times in the Highlands. The highest temperature of the 
month was 22.2C at Trawscoed, Ceredigion on 31 October. The lowest temperature 
was –5.0C at Tulloch Bridge, near Fort William, on 25 October.

Rainfall


The England and Wales rainfall total was just 43mm, or 44% of average. The 
equivalent figures for Scotland and Northern Ireland were 37% and 40%, 
respectively. Rainfall was below average except very locally in Norfolk and 
Lincolnshire. Shoeburyness in Essex and Kinloss in Moray both had only about 
16mm in the whole month. Unsurprisingly, heavy rainfall events were rare. 
Thundery showers on the east coast on 1 and 2 October gave 31mm of rain at 
Weybourne, Norfolk in 24 hours. A frontal system nudged north from France on 25 
October giving 37mm at Plymouth in a 24 hour period.

Sunshine


Northern Scotland was very sunny in the first week. Lerwick, Shetland, 
recorded over twice the average sunshine in the month with 132 hours of 
sunshine. This total was beaten only by Anglesey as the sunniest place in the 
UK. Sunshine was fairly close to average across much of central and eastern 
England but was above average in other parts of the UK.

Winds


With high pressure either over the UK or over Scandinavia, strong winds were 
remarkably absent in October. Winds were mostly south-easterly in the first ten 
days, more variable mid-month as the weather became unsettled and then light 
and variable later in the month.

Julian Mayes MeteoGroup
 