
In early 1927 Ansel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams> boasted to his future 
wife: "My photographs have now reached a stage where they are worthy of the 
world's critical examination." He was already committed to produce a portfolio 
of prints for his new benefactor, Albert Bender, a philanthropist with a deep 
commitment to San Francisco's world of arts and letters. Bender liked Adams's 
photographs, and proposed that he produce 100 portfolios of 18 prints, each 
portfolio to sell for $50. On the morning the project was born, Bender bought 
10 portfolios in advance and handed Adams his cheque for $500. While Adams sat 
"electrified", Bender sold by phone more than half the edition, even before all 
the negatives had been made. One might say that it was Bender, not Adams, who 
made the decision that Adams's pictures were ready for the world's critical 
examination.

The portfolio was called - at the insistence of the publisher - Parmelian 
Prints of the High Sierras . The term Parmelian was a synthetic and meaningless 
word, made up of bits and pieces of various high-toned real words, perhaps 
including Parthenon, Parnassus, amelioration, and Pelléas and Mélisande. The 
port-folio's title did make it clear that these were not ordinary photo-graphs. 
To some prospective purchasers, it may have obscured the fact that they were 
photo-graphs at all. The invented term had something of the Madison Avenue scam 
about it, and it was a mild embarrassment to Adams for the rest of his life, 
but perhaps not so embarrassing as the unwonted "s" on the end of Sierra.

The 18 pictures selected for the portfolio included three or four that might 
still be included in a selection of Adams's important work, but Adams was not 
yet at his full power. Nevertheless, he was learning rapidly. His development 
is documented with extraordinary clarity in the proof albums of his pictures 
made on the Sierra Club outings.

Beginning in 1925, he made albums of photographs on these mass camping trips 
for no fewer than nine years between that year and 1936. These thick albums of 
prints were deposited at the San Francisco office of the club, and from them 
members could order prints, at (in 1927) $1 each on white or buff stock, or 
$2.50 on the fancier "parchment" stock in a paper folder. A less compulsive 
worker than Adams would surely have edited his summer's take down to his 30 or 
40 best, which could still have covered all the memorable peaks, canyons and 
traverses, and which would have simplified Adams's printing problem. But 
luckily for photo historians, he seems to have included in his sample books 
every picture that was not a clear technical failure. Thus these albums provide 
a rare record of a major photographer in the process of learning his craft.

By 1928 one can see a new economy and sureness come into Adams's work. The 
peaks and ice fields and terrains of rubble begin to be - in addition to 
geological events - parts of pictorial patterns that possess an independent 
authority: designs that seem to recapitulate in visual terms the ancient 
history of the place.

The process by which an artist learns and grows is mysterious, but that does 
not mean that artists and critics will stop trying to explain when and from 
where the new knowledge comes. It is not quite satisfying to be told that 
growth comes in tiny increments, during long days of plain work. We prefer to 
think of it arriving as a series of epiphanies, each opening a door on to a 
world that had previously been hidden.

Adams described several such moments. One came in 1927 as he stood on a 
granite shelf 4,000ft above the floor of Yosemite Valley, facing the motif he 
later titled Monolith, the Face of Half Dome. With a single plate left in his 
camera bag, it came to Adams that the finished print might more closely match 
his sense of the emotional power of the experience if he revised the tonal 
relationships of the picture by exposing his negative through a red filter, 
which would deepen the tone of the sky almost to black.

Adams remembered the occasion because he had, for the first time, consciously 
applied a specific technical solution to an aesthetic problem. He used the red 
filter not by rote, or because dark skies were good, but because a dark sky was 
necessary for the picture he envisioned. Nevertheless, an epiphany that depends 
on the intercession of a red filter is not everything one might hope for. This 
first conscious memory of what Adams came to call previsualisation might be 
considered simply as another incremental piece of technical understanding. If 
the idea of previsualisation had been truly essential to his work, his earlier 
pictures would by definition have been failures, and it is clear that he 
continued to the end of his life to consider a substantial number of his 
earlier pictures to be among his important work.

The Monolith story might be more useful to an understanding of Adams's 
development if we consider it as one moment during a longer and broader change 
in his view of photographic form. One might say that until the mid-1930s 
Adams's landscape work is conceived largely in graphic terms - as pattern, and 
dependent primarily on choice of vantage point and framing. As that decade 
advanced, the coherence of Adams's pictures is increasingly dependent on the 
perfection of the tonal scale, which binds the picture together almost in a 
membrane of light.

Adams's greatest work was in the 1930s and 1940s, and by the end of this time 
he was famous, even if financially insecure. Nevertheless, he and his work were 
not universally admired. Adams was in fact never quite in step with the drummer 
of the political moment. During the 1930s, he did not photograph the dust bowl, 
or the Okie migration, like Dorothea Lange, nor did he measure the pulse of 
American culture, like Walker Evans.

In the 1940s he did not photograph the second world war and lesser 
conflagrations, like Robert Capa, or the death camps, like Margaret 
Bourke-White. He was instead somewhere in the high country, making photographs 
that would neither end the Depression nor help win the war. Some felt that his 
work was not quite relevant; their feeling was summed up most memorably a 
little later in a purported remark of Henri Cartier-Bresson to Nancy Newhall: 
"Now in this moment, in this crisis, with the world maybe going to pieces - to 
photograph a landscape !"

Years later, after Aldo Leopold and Rachel Carson had helped change the 
climate of values, Adams was credited with being socially relevant after all, 
but the prize was awarded on the basis of a misunderstanding. Adams did not 
photograph the landscape as a matter of social service, but as a form of 
private worship. It was his own soul that he was trying to save.

The young Adams wrote: "I saw more clearly than I have ever seen before or 
since the minute detail of the grasses, the clusters of sand shifting in the 
wind, the small flotsam of the forest, the motion of the high clouds streaming 
above the peaks." He was confessing to a private knowledge that is almost 
surely incommunicable but that he was nevertheless obliged to attempt to 
photograph. But there is, alas, no way to test the public, objective picture 
against the private, subjective experience; no trustworthy way to measure how 
well the art matches the emotion.

One might even suspect that, to the degree that the art succeeds, it has so 
distanced itself from the emotion that the latter is remembered only like an 
old love. Wordsworth said that poetry was emotion recollected in tranquillity, 
meaning that good poems are written in cold blood, as good generals fight wars. 
And yet behind the calculation, the knowledge, the expert cabinetmaking, there 
must stand the vital memory of deep experience, against which we try to measure 
the adequacy of what is at best only a picture, or a poem.

Adams's great work was done under the stimulus of a profound and mystical 
experience of the natural world. When he attempted to work without the support 
of that knowledge, or when its memory had become blunted or blurred, he was 
capable of empty self-imitation, but for the most part he declined to work 
without motive. In 1958 he made his superb Aspens, Northern New Mexico, and in 
1968 one of the best of his splendid pictures of El Capitan (see left), but in 
general the 1950s and the 1960s were dry decades, and after that Adams's 
energies were devoted to his duties as a conservation leader and to the 
obligations of fame, and to the reinterpretation of work done years before.

Toward the end of his career this reinterpretation seemed at times to amount 
almost to parody. The lyrical precision and perfect balance of his earlier work 
he reworked in his old age, too often replacing the elegance with melodrama, 
and the reverence with something approaching bombast. His consistent response 
to implicit queries about his radical recasting of his earlier work seems 
fundamentally an evasion. He said: "The negative is the score, and the print is 
the performance." Granted, but as a musician Adams had surely heard too many 
performances that had trespassed beyond the most elastic boundaries of the 
score's meaning and floundered into caricature. The change imposed on Mount 
McKinley and Wonder Lake 30 years later is not easy to understand (see left). 
Why this radiant peak, a reflection of our highest and purest aspirations, 
should have been transformed into a dirty snowdrift is a mystery to this viewer.

And yet it was surely Adams's right to make the change, and we should not be 
too swift, or too confident, in judging him wrong. It has been suggested that 
the change may have been caused by Adams's faltering vision, but the 
explanation seems not wholly persuasive. And in fact, perhaps there is a kind 
of logic in the radical late prints: perhaps they describe the completion of a 
change of view that had been taking place for many years. Those who are 
committed to the idea of art as self-expression might value these late prints 
as the last testament of an artist whose view of the world and the future had 
darkened.

Adams was - by strength of will, if not by nature - an optimist. As an 
optimist he saw the forces of environmental responsibility as ascendant, and 
the minds and hearts of the people moving steadily toward the understanding 
that something similar to reverence for our planet was the essential pre- 
condition to ethical life on it. He could point to many victories in support of 
this optimistic view: new parks, new laws, burgeoning memberships for 
environmental organisations, etc, and these victories were undeniably real.

But in between the parks and the national monuments and the wilderness areas - 
in the farming country, grazing country and the logging country and the mining 
country, even on public lands, and on the ocean banks, and along the 
lengthening strip developments, and in the new suburbs that no longer related 
to an urban centre - the picture provided much less ground for cheer.

As a conservationist, a democrat and a deeply moral man, Adams was committed 
to the social duty of doing the best he could, of making the best possible 
bargain, of slowing the advance of barbaric greed until there came a great 
change of heart, or until some great geologic objection might resolve the 
question in its own unanswerable way. But in his darkroom he did not need to be 
the reasonable, responsible, kindly representative of a reasonable position; 
perhaps there he could give free rein to his intuition of the future.

William James held that order and disorder were human inventions. I think that 
most artists would disagree. The elder Renoir said: "At the start I see my 
subject in a sort of haze. I know perfectly well that what I shall see in it 
later is there all the time, but it only becomes apparent after a while." Adams 
would also disagree, perhaps citing harmonic overtones to support his view. But 
if finally brought into James's light, he might then insist that, once 
invented, the new structures of order are factual and objective, and possibly 
even permanent, within the measure of man's tenure.

The interests of an artist and of his audience are in the end quite different. 
As Adams's audience we are grateful to him for enlarging our emotional 
knowledge of the natural world, the knowledge of its constant mutability - that 
it is (one might say) alive. If we avert our eyes for a moment, we will return 
them to a different world, a constant source of wonder and deep surprise, which 
we love not only as an aesthetic delight, but as a deep moral cryptogram to 
which we have no key.

An artist is also a member of art's audience, and as such shares our 
interests; but finally he is interested in something else. He is interested in 
demonstrating to himself, by the authority of his work, that his world is not 
an illusion, not an invention of the imagination, but rather a real world, of 
which he is therefore a real part.

So if we ask the question "What did Ansel Adams do for us?" one useful answer 
would be, "Nothing, he did it all for himself."

The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
Clarifications column, Tuesday July 2 2002

At the conclusion of this article we should have mentioned the exhibition of 
Ansel Adams' photographs at the Hayward Gallery, London. The show - Ansel Adams 
at 100 - runs from July 11 to September 22. Details: 020-7960 4242.
 