
Day 1

Walking into the first rehearsal I didn't realise this was really the start of 
my "favourite week ever'' (which, if my wife asks, was our honeymoon). I 
managed to miss the train's departure from London but caught up with everyone 
in Leeds for the first night of rehearsals, which were in full swing. I'd been 
biting my nails about working with such a huge group of artists from all over 
the world, including some of my idols – Tony Allen, Baaba Maal, Bassekou 
Kouyate, Martina Topley-Bird – as well exciting young guns like Fatou Diawara, 
Manifest, The Bots, Rye Rye, and Jack from Bombay Bicycle Club. Let the games 
begin ...

Day 2 Middlesborough

We started the day off with a pop-up show at a YMCA in Bradford where Rizzle 
Kicks did some freestyling before Maximo Park played. I took part in a workshop 
to help encourage a new wave of producers in Bradford.

The rush I got seeing our train – the Africa Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> – for the first time, 
chugging towards us at the station, didn't leave until the tour was over.

Then we were jamming in the train's rehearsal space (next to the massage 
parlour). We were musically feeling each other out, exploring and mining each 
other's idiosyncrasies.

Then the first gig, where we came to understand how things would work, 
typically with each artist playing one or two songs, in collaboration with any 
of the other 80-odd acts on the tour.

My favourite moment was the "WE WANT MORE" chant with which Middlesborough 
greeted the end. The lights came on but Carl Barat sang back to them without a 
mic - or rather, sang with them.

Hotel party!!

Day 3 Glasgow

Riding into town from the hotel to the station we were caught up in Rizzle 
Mania: throngs of teenage Rizzle Kicks fans screaming for autographs.

On the train, we crossed the border into Scotland and a group of bagpipe 
players came on board, and walked through the carriages to welcome us with 
hearty Scottish music.

My favourite new discovery in Glasgow was Jupiter & Okwess International, a 
group from Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I had seen them on the 
train but wasn't sure what they did and my French being as it is, I didn't ask. 
Boy, was I in for a great surprise.

I finally got to play one of my own songs, Let Them Talk, with Romeo (from The 
Magic Numbers), the Temper Trap guys, Paul from Maximo Park, a horn section … 
and our secret weapon, the drummer Seb Rochford who usually plays with Rokia 
Traore.

I also got to rap on Dead Prez's Hip-Hop alongside the Egyptian rapper Karim, 
as well as M1, Afrikan Boy and Manifest. I've been a fan of that song since 
before I could grow a beard, and I'd missed my chance to rap on it the night 
before… I was not going to let it pass by again!

Day 4 Manchester

I walked into the lobby in the hotel in Glasgow, and the first thing I was 
told was "Spoek, Peter Hook is going to play with you tonight" – on the cover 
that I perform of Joy Division's She's Lost Control. I was ready to take off! 
I'd never spoken directly to any of the members of the band and wasn't sure how 
they'd take our version. But when he showed up to our short soundcheck, he was 
so easy going. The show was a dream come true.

Hotel parrrrrrrty!!

Day 5 Cardiff

I overslept and came down to an empty hotel lobby, which meant I missed the 
train, but a coach for such eventualities took me on to Wales. I started to 
form the idea of working with each and every musician on the train in some 
capacity. A lot of cultural barriers and walls have been broken down this week, 
in a really profound way.

Day 5 Bristol

The show was a bit weird at the beginning, then the energy and intensity and 
tension just ramped up. It had so many climaxes. John Paul Jones from Led 
Zeppelin was now on board, and he stumbled into a cover version of their 
classic Kashmir that the Temper Trap guys, Bashy and others were playing.

Day 6 London

The fateful last day is here. I am properly sad to be leaving the tour. 
Tonight's show will be intense, with some more suprise special guests. I'm kind 
of weepy and choked up to be honest.
 