
Yesterday morning in New York all bridges, airports and tunnels were closed. 
The United Nations building was sealed. British Airways flights to the US were 
grounded. Once again, economic life in that vibrant city came to a screaming 
halt.

In response, the markets hardly moved. Sure, the dollar wobbled and the Dow 
dropped a couple of hundred points at one stage. But the reaction was muted, to 
say the least.

In the same warped way that we all became blasé about big financial num bers 
during the internet boom, it now seems that the markets are indifferent to 
shocking numbers of dead, whether it's delegates attending a technology 
conference on the 105th floor of one of the twin towers or Muslim fighters 
being vapourised on an Afghan mountain ridge.

Late yesterday, the Dow Jones index stood about 0.5% below its level on 
September 10. The FTSE 100 is up 2% over the same period. Yes, up.

Of course, we are all used to irrational market reactions. What is more 
puzzling is that this benign view is routinely backed up by economic 
forecasters in both the City of London and the Treasury. The breezy consensus 
is that the British economy will grow well in excess of 2% this year and, while 
expansion might have accelerated next year but for the terror, the pace of 
growth is now expected to fall just slightly during 2002.

These forecasts are being made in the face of a British manufacturing sector 
already in recession. Airlines, hotels, tourism, London black cabs, the theatre 
industry, investment banking, advertising, marketing, media, information 
technology, and most other forms of business service have been brought to their 
knees over recent weeks.

Profitability has been blown away. In the US, figures out yesterday indicate 
that headline corporate earnings fell by almost threequarters during the three 
months to the end of September. The picture is unlikely to be substantially 
better in Britain in the coming months.

So it is tempting to ask those who talk of a limited economic reaction to the 
terror attacks where exactly all this "growth" might happen.

The pat answer is that consumers are still spending and should continue to do 
so while interest rates remain at such outstanding lows.

That seems heroically over-optimistic. The markets are in denial, and so are 
those economic forecasters who think that cheap money will just magic away the 
feelbad factor.

Groundhog Day


For some trade negotiators, it must feel like Groundhog Day - with 24 hours to 
go to the deadline of the World Trade Organisation's Doha meeting, agriculture 
has once again emerged as the deciding issue. The European Union's insistence 
that it will not pre-commit to phasing out its bloated farm subsidy system 
could yet scupper attempts to launch a new round of global trade negotiations.

So far, so familiar. But the tired old message from Brussels should not 
obscure the fact that things are changing at the WTO. Yesterday, developing 
countries won a significant victory with the deal on drug patents which 
reflects their new found muscle within the 142-nation organisation.

What was remarkable about the breakthrough is that the pharmaceutical lobby 
did not get a look in. The new agreement makes it crystal clear that developing 
countries can override patents in the interests of public health and, even if 
the legal language is not as strong as some campaigners were hoping, the 
political message is quite clear: lobbying power in Washington has its limits.

The next set of lobbyists which should be shown the door are those that claim 
to speak for Europe and America's farmers. A policy which sees western nations 
spending six times the level of their aid to the developing world on 
agricultural subsidies at home is untenable.

The EU's claim that it backs a development round of global trade talks would 
be a lot more convincing if it came to the table with a pledge to scrap the 
Common Agricultural Policy.

 Silly discount


 If the shareholder spat over directors' share dealings at Mountview Estates 
proves one thing, it is that there is growing investor interest in the firm. 
This is not surprising, given the ludicrously understated value of the main 
assets - 3,200 tenanted residential properties, mainly in London. At around 
£120m, the company's market capitalisation stands at just 20% over book value - 
or less than £40,000 per dwelling.

The housing market in the capital may be under some pressure, but this sort of 
discount is silly. It is time Mountview revalued its portfolio. It is a public 
company and all shareholders have a right to know what it might be worth.
 