
May in Ayemenem is a hot brooding month, where the days are long and humid, 
crows gorge on bright mangoes and too many overwrought descriptive passages 
pile up in a car-crash of a creative writing tutorial.

But forget about that, because it was early June, the time when the monsoon 
breaks, the yellow bullfrogs etc, etc ... when Rahel returned to the house. 
Baby Kochamma was still alive. She was Rahel's baby grand aunt, but Rahel 
hadn't come to visit her. She had come to see her dizygotic twin, Estha, from 
whom she has been separated for 23 years.

Her mind inevitably goes back to a deeper, more secret poetic space. A space 
when Life was full of Beginnings and no Ends, before Edges, Borders and Capital 
Letters began to appear. She remembers what the Orangedrink Lemondrink Man did 
to Estha even though he never actually told her what happened. But these are 
Small Things.

And that was before they were nearly born on a bus, before Ammu and her father 
were divorced, before Ammu died at 31, a dieable viable age, before the 
unthinkable became thinkable and Sophie Mol died at seven, a dieable, non 
viable age, before Estha was Returned, before she had gone to Canada to get 
married, before she had got divorced. But these too are Small Things.

Even before Sophie Mol's funeral, the police found Velutha by the river. A 
river with a rushing, rolling, fishswimming sense. A river swollen, engorged 
with meaningless imagery. Yes, it had all begun with Sophie Mol in the days 
before the Love Laws were rewritten.

It was a skyblue day in 1969 when Rahel found herself in a fictive time-slip. 
She gasped in amazement as the skyblue Plymouth pulled up and her uncle Chacko 
got out and talked about how Pappachi started drinking after a moth wasn't 
named after him and used to beat up Mammachi until he warned him off, how he 
had been a Rhodes scholar, had married Margaret and had a child, Sophie Mol, 
how she had left him, how he had returned to Kerala to run Mammachi's Paradise 
Pickles and Preserves factories, how he was a supporter of the Keralan 
Communist Party run by Comrade Pilla, how ...

"Stop, Uncle," Rahel said. "There are too many names, too many things going 
on. I can't keep up."

"That's the whole point," Chacko replied. "This is India, a land of sensory 
and poetic overload, a land where small boats bob in rippling water of green 
silk, a land teeming with literary prizes for those who can find the right 
imagery to win them. But these are small things."

"Is there a God of Small Things?"

"There must be if I won the Booker,"

Rahel went off to find her dizygotic twin. "Stel klat sdrawkcab ot eno 
rehtona," she said. "Yhw dluow ew tnaw ot od taht?" "Esuaceb sti eht tros fo 
suoitneterp parc sniwt od ni siht dnik fo koob."

It took Rahel a few moments to realise she was now back in 1992 as she passes 
the tumbled-down factory, where no trees now grew and an elephant lazily etc 
... She thought deep thoughts of the Love Laws, Small Things and why Estha 
hadn't spoken for years since he was Returned.

"We are going to the movies," said Ammu. "And when we get back Margaret and 
Sophie Mol will have arrived from England, now that Margaret's second husband 
Joe has died."

They got into the skyblue Plymouth and drove past sun burnished banana 
sellers, sheltering under parched palms etc ... towards Cochin. "I need a 
drink," said Estha, as the nuns began singing in The Sound of Music.

"Come here," said the Orangedrink LemonDrink Man. "If you hold my penis, I 
will give you a free drink." Estha did as he was told and after some hot fluid 
had been deposited in his hands he returned to his seat. He didn't quite know 
why it had happened, or what relevance it had to the story as he never 
mentioned it again. It was probably another of those Small Things.

Sophie Mol had arrived by the time they returned and was being fussed over by 
everyone. "Ti skool ekil ew era llams sgniht won," Rahel said to Estha, as 
Ammu, Chacko and Baby Kochamma ignored them. "Don't be horrid to us, Ammu." 
they begged. "If you talk like that, I shall love you a little less," she 
replied. And so the Love Laws began to get rewritten. In a Small Way.

Rahel remembered that every piece of Indian fiction required a dream sequence, 
so as she sat down next to the silent Estha, she went into a prolonged 
unnecessary reverie of Kathakali dancers that reminded her of just how Indian 
she really was.

A deep longing burnt deep in Ammu's vagina as she lay in the bedroom whose 
walls would soon learn their harrowing secrets. She needed Velutha's hard, 
lithe Untouchable body and he needed hers. It was against the Love Laws yet the 
Love Laws could not contain the primal urges of a dark sexuality unleashed. And 
hopefully breaking the Love Laws would only be a Small Thing.

In the abandoned house, where vapid vinegary fumes etc... where Ammu conjoined 
with Velutha in sentences of disaggregated phrases, there Rahel and Estha found 
a broken boat. "Please mend it for us, Velutha," so we can cross the swirling, 
Forbidden River.

"Take me with you," begged Sophie Mol. "I've had enough of all this relentless 
Indianness."

As they reached the middle of the Swirling, Forbidden River, the boat 
capsized. Rahel and Estha swam to safety; Sophie Mol was swept under. "Ho 
raed," the dizygotic twins said. "S'tel epoh sti tsuj a Llams Gniht."

It was a Big Small Thing. Chacko was crazed with grief and blamed Velutha. 
"Arrest the Untouchable," he ordered the police. The police came for Velutha 
with batons. He was of a caste of no consequence. He did not survive the night 
in the blood stained cell, where rivulets etc...

"It was not Velutha," Ammu wept. "I have been having an affair with an 
Untouchable."

"That's even worse than Velutha killing Sophie Mol," yelled Chacko.

"The only way to save our honour is to get the twins to lie," said Baby 
Kochamma, fingering her silken scarf with pleasure at her niece's discomfort.

"It was Velutha," said Estha. The last words before he was Returned to the 
north by train, the last words Rahel ever heard him utter.

Rahel pulled Estha close. It was the first time they had touched one another 
in 23 years. They undressed silently and conjoined in the Quietness and 
Emptiness like stacked spoons. There had been no reason for them to sleep 
together, but it seemed like the sort of ending the chatterati might like.

"It's only a Small Thing," Rahel said.

"It might have been for you, but it's been a fucking Big Thing for me," 
Arundhati replied. "It's taken me four years to write and it's still not very 
good. I'm not doing that again in a hurry."
 