
From this week Myanmar has a genuinely civilian government, its first in more 
than half a century. The trouble is that it still has a military government as 
well. Whether, how, and when these two governments can be reconciled and made 
into one are questions that will probably be slowly and incrementally answered 
over the next few years. It is not going to be an easy process. Under the new 
president,Htin Kyaw, who took office on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/myanmar-swears-in-htin-kyaw-as-first-civilian-president-in-decades>
, Aung San Suu Kyi has taken four ministries: those of foreign affairs, 
presidential affairs, energy and education. That is a formidable bundle and, in 
addition to the influence inherent in these positions, a bill to create a new 
post of high state adviser and bestow it on her 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-myanmar-politics-idUSKCN0WX0OQ>is going 
through the legislature.

Other members of the National League for Democracy, whose decisive victory in 
the general elections <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-33547036> last 
November led to these changes, have been given other important portfolios, and 
some have gone to the leaders of allied parties. All this suggests that the new 
government should soon be able to get down to tackling Myanmar’s many problems 
without further let or hindrance.

But the military, under a constitution that cannot be changed without their 
consent, still control the key portfolios of defence, border affairs and home 
affairs. Apart from direct control of the armed forces, that gives them great 
influence over local government, over security and administration in border 
areas, and control of the police. In the national defence and security council, 
they hold the majority of posts. The commander-in-chief also has wide-ranging 
powers. In the legislature, soldiers have as of right 25% of seats.

They hold the same proportion in local assemblies. These positions used to be 
closely coupled to the formal government machine, because soldiers and 
ex-soldiers were also dominant there. They have now been uncoupled, becauseAung 
San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> and her party 
have displaced the military at that level. But will these still-military power 
centres obey her or will they instead respond to the commands of what would be 
in effect a shadow government? Or will it sometimes be one and sometimes the 
other, as individuals and groups calculate their interests and judge the 
overall balance of power?

Three important issues will all strain whatever degree of cooperation between 
the civilian government and the military exists. First, there is an urgent need 
for progress toward settlement of the ethnic insurgencies that the army in the 
past signally failed to achieve either by force or by negotiation. Their 
nationwide ceasefire agreement, in spite of the name, settled very little.

Second, fighting will only end if federal status is given to minority areas, 
but that will involve dislodging the military in those places and, ultimately, 
rewriting the constitution. The special case of Arakan, by contrast, needs a 
firm hand – and obedient security forces – because Arakanese prejudice against 
the Rohingya is so entrenched.

Third, Aung San Suu Kyi must take a decision on the future of the Myitsone dam 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/business/14887-cpi-pushes-for-restart-of-myitsone-dam.html>
, a big army project which is unpopular because of the disruption it would 
cause and the fact that most of the electricity would go to China. These and 
other choices would be difficult enough if Myanmar had a unified government. 
They will be tougher still if civilians and soldiers cannot work together.
 