
No doubt about it: £844m is a pretty price for a business contributing annual 
sales of £334m and making profits of £24m. Pearson, in selling theFinancial 
Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes> Group to Nikkei of 
Japan, also gets to keep a half-share in the Economist plus the newspaper’s 
office on the south side of Southwark Bridge. It’s been a successful 
negotiation, then. But has Pearson been a good owner of the FT?

In terms of being a responsible owner, the answer is a definite yes. Editorial 
independence is guaranteed absolutely at the FT, and always has been under 
Pearson. Chief executiveJohn Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-fallon> was fully entitled to boast on 
that score. And, as far as one can tell, Nikkei looks as likely as any possible 
owner to maintain high standards.

But commercially good? That’s trickier. The sale price is nice, but the FT 
also feels like a opportunity wasted to build a financial publishing powerhouse 
capable of challenging the likes of Bloomberg. The FT name has never been 
stronger and the journalistic output is excellent. The missing ingredient has 
been ambition and long-term investment.

Yes, the digital transformation of the paper has been smooth, and 500,000 
paying subscribers speak for themselves. But even in the days when former chief 
executive Dame Marjorie Scardino was declaring that the FT would only be sold 
“over my dead body”, the group seemed uncertain about the size of business it 
wanted to build around the paper.

Mergermarket, a subscription-based corporate news and analysis service, came 
in 2006 and departed in 2013 for a handsome profit that more than compensated 
for the initial losses on setting up FT.com. That sale underlined how dogged
Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> would be in 
concentrating on its education businesses around the world.

On Thursday, Fallon talked about an “inflection point” in media-land as mobile 
and social networking services enjoy “explosive” growth. OK, but owners of 
newspapers have been talking about inflection points ever since the days of hot 
metal. Pearson, in reality, hasn’t met a sudden fork in the road. Instead, it 
has drifted over many years to a position where selling was the only logical 
commercial decision.

An honourable and upright owner, certainly. But a more committed owner of a 
superb asset such as the FT might have built a business that the shareholders 
would wish to keep.

Jam tomorrow, but in a jam today

When an investment trust has, in effect, been given a year to prove it 
deserves to exist in current form, it helps to get off to a flyer.Alliance Trust
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> hasn’t. In the six months 
to the end of June, “We have underperformed a number of our peers,” chief 
executive Katherine Garrett-Cox was obliged to confess on Thursday. Net asset 
value advanced by only 1.4%; 28 out of 35 competitors did better.


Naturally, there was an explanation and a promise of better times ahead. 
June’s upset in the bond markets affected returns, but July has started well. 
Unfortunately for Alliance, such comments may reinforce the impression that the 
story remains one of “jam tomorrow”.

That, one can guess, is what the agitators at hedge fund Elliott Advisors 
would be saying if they hadn’t signed a one-year gagging clause as part of a 
truce deal in April. That agreement saw Alliance welcome two of Elliott’s 
nominated candidates on to its board without a shareholder vote. It was an 
attempt to settle key arguments. Should Alliance disband its in-house operation 
and just hire a cheaper external manager? Should two subsidiaries – one a 
savings platform, the other in specialist funds – be sold?

As it happens, those questions may be settled in less than a year. The board 
says it is “actively engaged” in addressing shareholders’ concerns and will 
opine in the autumn. It would be astonishing if Elliott, with a 12% stake and 
now a foot in the door, decided that, actually, everything is fine. There will 
be change – the only argument is about its extent.

But let’s hope that the voices of retail investors are genuinely heard. A 
“significant proportion” of the shareholder base may indeed want an overhaul. 
But quite a few probably don’t.

Making the right bet

Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> cannot 
complain. Blame for the near-demise of HBOS may be distributed widely when we 
finally see the official report. But if you were chief executive of the ship 
when it hit the rocks, you can’t expect to be a main-board director of another 
quoted company.


After the merger of Coral (where he works now) and Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes>, Hornby will be chief 
operating officer but, crucially, won’t sit on the board. It’s the correct 
decision, and fund managers were right to insist upon it.
 