 New York was left reeling yesterday after a plane carrying 255 people crashed 
into a residential neighbourhood three minutes after leaving JFK international 
airport. Fear swept across a city already devastated by the September 11 
attacks on the World Trade Centre and terrified by deadly anthrax scares.
The American Airlines plane crashed into houses in Queens and immediately 
prompted government officials to consider shutting down all of the nation's 
airports. The country was placed on a high state of alert just two months and a 
day after the twin towers of the World Trade Centre were destroyed by 
terrorists who turned two hijacked passenger jets into bombs.

In addition to the deaths on the plane, six local residents were reported 
missing.

Only hours after the crash, government officials steered the public away from 
theories of a terrorist attack. Significantly, the crash was being investigated 
by the national transportation safety board in conjunction with the FBI, rather 
than those involved in the operation against the al-Qaida network. There had 
been no "credible threats" or intelligence gathered by the CIA that indicated 
such an attack.

But New York was taking no chances. All bridges and tunnels into Manhattan 
were closed, along with the city's three airports. The United Nations, where 
world leaders were attending an annual general assembly debate, closed its 
headquarters to pedestrians and vehicles and the Empire State building was 
evacuated.

It is believed the pilot dumped the aircraft's fuel shortly after take-off. 

As bodies were taken from the scene to a nearby mortuary, the flight data 
recorder was recovered and was flown to Washington for analysis.

American Airlines flight 587 was heading to Santo Domingo in the Dominican 
Republic when it exploded mid-air at 9.17am, scattering burning wreckage and 
shards of metal across the streets of Rockaway. There was no distress call from 
the cockpit and witnesses on the ground reported seeing an explosion on board 
and hearing a "sonic boom".

It is believed that the Airbus A300's engines separated from the hull of the 
twin-engined plane, one narrowly missing a petrol station and the other landing 
on a boat parked in a back garden. Some witnesses reported that the engine was 
seen falling from the plane before the crash, while others said that it was 
still intact.

Terrified residents thought that they were being attacked. "People were 
screaming and running," said Janet Barasso, who fled with her two sons, aged 10 
and 16. "I thought we were being bombed, because I didn't see the plane."

Retired firefighter Tom Lynch said he saw what appeared to be the plane 
exploding and one of its wings fall off. "It definitely exploded in the sky. It 
wasn't that loud. I saw a whoof, a flame, and what looked like a wing falling 
off the airplane and it nosedived right down."

Another witness described how she could see "the plane going down, nose first, 
belly facing us, going straight down". She said: "It was intact. The wings were 
there, the tail was there, the nose was there, no smoke coming from it, against 
the blue sky."

The wreckage resulted in several crash sites and fires and involved at least 
12 buildings on the ground in the suburb of Rockaway, Queens, 15 miles from 
densely populated Manhattan, a city still in shock from the September 11 
attacks. A portion of a wing was found in nearby Jamaica Bay.

William Shumann, a spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration, said: 
"So far, we are treating this as an aircraft accident and not a terrorist act. 
That is subject to change as we learn more."

The city's mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, also said he did not believe the incident 
was related to terrorism. "We're sensible and we understand what happened 
before so for a while the city is going to be on an even higher state of alert. 
We're being tested one more time, and we're going to pass this test," he said. 
"We have several conflicting reports of what happened. Obviously, it did a lot 
of damage. We don't know the full extent of it."

Donald Carty, chairman of American Airlines, said: "At this time we have 
absolutely no indication of what caused the accident."

President George Bush was handed a note informing him of the crash at 9.25am 
while he was in a meeting of the national security council. He was joined in 
the White House situation room by Tom Ridge, director of homeland security, and 
held a conference call with the attorney general, John Ashcroft.

The White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said the early evidence suggested that 
it was an accident but it was too early to confirm that. He said there was as 
yet no evidence of an explosion on board and wanted to urge caution about any 
conclusions.

"On the question of whether there is any terrorism... we have not ruled 
anything in, not ruled anything out," he said. "But by all first reports, there 
were no unusual communications between the cockpit and the tower at JFK or the 
New York facility that was handed over communications after the plane departed 
from the airport area."

Mr Fleischer added that the president was concerned about the impact on the 
city of New York and the fact that it "has to endure any other accident or 
anything else that this may or may not be".

The US stockmarket fell sharply on news of the crash. Airline stocks were 
particularly under pressure in an already fragile environment. The crash 
yesterday prompted many Americans to say that they will never fly again.

Rockaway had already suffered terribly as a result of the September 11 
attacks: the town was home to around 90 of those who died at the World Trade 
Centre, including firefighters, police officers and brokers with Cantor 
Fitzgerald.

Fighter jets were seen over the scene. Emergency medical centres were set up 
in two local schools and more than 200 family members of those who died 
gathered at the Ramada Plaza hotel in Queens. The vast majority were Dominican.

The streets of New York were quiet as panicked residents were fearful of 
another attack. The crash sent many anxious people home.
 