
Viva Garibaldi! Une Odyssée en 1860 by Alexandre Dumas. Fayard, 610 pp., €23, 
February 2002, 2 213 61230 7

Alexandre Dumas was a force of nature. The 650 or so books he published might 
not seem an extraordinary tally for such as Barbara Cartland, who could dictate 
six thousand words between lunch and tea, or Georges Simenon, who rarely spent 
more than a fortnight on a novel. But Dumas was not merely a novelist: he also 
wrote plays, travel books, memoirs, histories, accounts of great crimes plus a 
mass of 'occasional' writings which include his vast Grand Dictionnaire de 
cuisine.

Even as a novelist the scale of his achievement seems scarcely human. The 
Three Musketeers (1844), the first episode of a saga totalling a million and a 
quarter words, is as long as five Simenons, yet fills just two of the 310 
volumes of the Calmann-Lévy edition of his complete works. These run to some 37 
million words, or an average of 16,000 words written weekly over four decades 
and 15 titles a year. Among them are novels both long and short which contain, 
it has been estimated, four thousand main characters, nine thousand secondary 
roles, and 25,000 walk-on parts. Nor is there any way of calculating his sales 
during his lifetime. In 1893, however, his son reported that in the two decades 
since his death, six hundred of his books had been re-serialised in newspapers, 
nearly three million volumes had been sold, and eighty million instalments had 
been issued as weekly parts.

Dumas said he was born without even bootstraps to pull himself up with, but he 
chose his parents well. His mother was an innkeeper's daughter who gave him 
unstinting love and his father was a stupendous role model. Thomas-Alexandre 
Davy de la Pailleterie was born in Santo Domingo in 1760, the illegitimate son 
of a French-born Marquis and Marie-Cessette Dumas, a plantation slave. Disowned 
by his father, he returned to France in 1786 and, taking his mother's name, 
became a soldier. During the Revolution, he rose through the ranks and was a 
general at 33. He was a man of commanding presence, great courage and colossal 
physical strength: it was said that 'the Black Devil' could hold four rifles at 
the end of his outstretched arm, one finger in each barrel. In Egypt in 1799 he 
quarrelled with Napoleon, accusing him of putting personal ambition before 
Revolutionary principles; he was sent home. On the way, his ship was detained 
in Southern Italy by Ferdinand, King of the Two Sicilies, then at war with 
France. For two years he was left to rot in Brindisi castle. In a neighbouring 
cell, the geologist Dolomieu, another prisoner of war, applied himself, using 
soot, a stick and the margins of Bibles, to the composition of The Philosophy 
of Mineralogy. It was a bit like Edmond Dantès and the abbé Faria in the 
Chateau d'If, except that the general, his health and career broken, returned 
to France in 1801 and died of stomach cancer in 1806. Alexandre was four.

From his father, he inherited healthy appetites and the dark skin and tight 
curls which would later prove a boon to caricaturists. He grew up at 
Villers-Cotterêts, 50 miles north-east of Paris, where he was happy and largely 
impervious to education. At 15 he was set to work in a lawyer's office but 
dreamed of literary glory. In 1823 he moved to Paris, where he read insatiably, 
and wrote unperformable plays, overheated poems and a collection of stories 
which, when it was published in 1826 at his own expense, sold four copies. His 
father's old colleagues, not wishing to resurrect their Napoleonic youth, were 
reluctant to help. Instead, Dumas acquired a well-connected mistress who eased 
his entry into fashionable social and literary circles. Soon, he was one of the 
Jeunes France intent on breathing passion and life into the bloodless literary 
tradition and it was he who, in 1829, with a violent, sensational play set in 
the 1570s, scored the first success of the new Romantic drama.

The literary revolution for which he had struck the first blow was confirmed 
by Hugo's Hernani in 1830, the year of France's second revolution. During the 
July Days, Dumas manned barricades and dodged bullets. Single-handedly, he 
overpowered the bemused and unresisting garrison of a gunpowder store at 
Soissons and then, in a splendid uniform of his own design, he toured the 
royalist Vendée to drum up support for Lafayette's National Guard. Undaunted, 
he returned to the fleshpots, to new mistresses and his writing table.

He was the darling of the Boulevard theatres. Antony, a triumph in 1831, gives 
an idea of his manner. Antony loves Adèle. In the last act, she explains that 
she can never be his for she is married and virtuous. There comes a thunderous 
knock at the door. Ciel! Her husband! Knowing there is no other way of saving 
the reputation of the woman he adores, Antony stabs her and, as the door bursts 
open, declaims: "She was resisting me! I killed her!" - a curtain line judged 
by all to be sublime. At one performance, an inexperienced stage hand lowered 
the curtain before the famous words could be uttered and Bocage, the celebrated 
actor playing the lead, went home in disgust. But the audience, cheated of what 
they had come to hear, refused to leave and threatened to riot. Order was not 
restored until Marie Dorval, still lying on the stage, got up, faced the 
audience and said: "I was resisting him. He killed me. Voilà ."

Dumas supplied tremendous dramas to order, but he also rewrote plays by other 
hands - Gaillardet's La Tour de Nesle (1832), for example, the century's most 
performed melodrama. The same year he escaped the cholera outbreak, so he 
claimed, by drinking a glass of ether, and in 1833 avoided the consequences of 
his political objections to the new regime by travelling to Switzerland. When 
the going got tough, Dumas always left town. The result was the first of many 
travel books (Italy, the Rhine and North Africa would follow). He returned to 
the theatre with Kean (1836), but Romantic drama had peaked and the public was 
finding new gods to worship.

In 1836, two Paris dailies halved their cover price by accepting 
advertisements. Newspaper proprietors then discovered that running novels in 
instalments boosted circulation and that the words 'To be continued' were an 
infallible recipe for brand loyalty. The roman feuilleton offered huge rewards 
to novelists who could supply high-octane fiction to order. Sainte-Beuve 
dismissed it as 'industrial literature' and Balzac, who took too long to warm 
up in his stories, greatly envied the success of the more expeditious Frédéric 
Soulié, Eugène Sue and Dumas, the King ofRomance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/romance>, who all acquired star status.

It was thus Dumas's good fortune to coincide with the rise of the popular 
press and the printing revolution which lowered the price of books. But he also 
had the knack and the relish for it, not to mention the stamina which kept him 
at his desk for 14 hours at a stretch. He was careless with money, keeping cash 
in a tobacco-jar from which friends helped themselves, and when out of funds he 
didn't scruple to borrow his cab fare from whomever was on hand. He squandered 
the advances he received and sentenced himself cheerfully to a game of 
catch-up, writing to honour contracts and signing new ones in order to stay 
solvent.

He spent far too much to be rich. In 1847, he realised his dream of owning his 
own theatre, the Théàtre Historique, where he staged Shakespeare, Goethe and 
Schiller but also adaptations of his own novels: La Jeunesse des mousquetaires, 
for example, or La Reine Margot, which lasted nine hours. The same year, he 
spent vast sums on a grandiose residence at Marly, near Versailles, which he 
called the Château de Monte-Cristo. Within three years, his theatre had failed 
and he was forced to sell his house at a loss to an American dentist. Dumas 
rolled up his sleeves, sharpened a new quill (he hated steel nibs), and signed 
yet more new contracts.

He had loathed the bourgeois reign of Louis-Philippe and, after the Revolution 
of 1848 had brought it to an end, stood as a liberal candidate in three 
elections held that year. Each time he polled only a few hundred votes, partly 
because his republicanism, though sincere, was naive, and perhaps because of 
his way with hecklers, who might find themselves tipped into the nearest river. 
He was offended by the naked ambition of Louis-Napoleon, much as the first 
Napoleon had offended his father in 1799; and in 1851, after the coup d'état 
which made Louis-Napoleon emperor, he fled to Belgium. But while Hugo retreated 
to lofty political and poetic exile in the Channel Islands, Dumas, friend of 
kings and loved by all, went on courting publicity.

His pen was an extension of his exuberant personality. He wrote his immensely 
entertaining Mémoires (1852), founded newspapers (when Le Mousquetaire, for 
which he wrote most of the copy, folded, he started Le Monte-Cristo) and, 
returning to Paris, thrilled a new generation of readers with novels like Les 
Mohicans de Paris (1854-57). He also wrote engaging, informative books about 
countries he had never visited. Just as Georges (1843) had evoked Mauritius, so 
Un Gil Blas en Californie (1851) was a vivid description of life in gold-mad 
San Francisco culled from newspaper articles and conversations with a man who 
had been there.

He travelled, in his customary style, to Russia, where 'the great Dumas', now 
the most famous living Frenchman, was given a hero's welcome. He added to his 
collection of medals and honours, and designed a 'Russian' costume which 
featured bear fur and a belt of bullets. On his return in 1859, he decided to 
sail round the Near East and bring back a Mediterranean saga which would 
describe the world of Napoleon, Augustus, Constantine, Christ, Sesostris, 
Hannibal and El Cid. But in Turin he met Garibaldi, who had not forgotten the 
support Dumas had given in 1848 to the liberators of Montevideo. He invited 
Dumas to translate and rewrite his memoirs as a way of publicising a new cause: 
the unification of Italy. When he heard in May 1860 that Garibaldi had sailed 
for Sicily, Dumas changed his plans and followed in his schooner, the Emma.

But not with all convenient speed. He missed the taking of Palermo, having 
dallied at Marseille to throw a party and stopped for a day in Sardinia to hunt 
wild boar. When he arrived, the battle was won, though the struggle to unite 
Italy continued. Dumas sailed back to Marseille, bought guns for the cause and 
returned, anchoring the Emma in the bay of Naples while the battle raged in the 
city. He wore a white costume, bombarded the city with revolutionary 
proclamations from his own printing press, distributed guns, and set his 
on-board tailors to sew red shirts for Garibaldi's Thousand. When Naples fell, 
he made no effort to conceal his delight at the collapse of the regime which 
had wrecked his father's life. He broke out the champagne and organised a 
victory display of fireworks which he had brought for the purpose. He was 
declared a hero and given a palace in which to live for a year. He promptly 
founded an Italian-language newspaper, L'Indipendente, most of the contents of 
which he wrote himself.

Une Odyssée en 1860, meticulously edited by Claude Schopp, is a fuller version 
of On Board the 'Emma', a text translated by Richard Garnett in 1929. It is 
vintage Dumas, overflowing with the glorious immodesty of a man who spent his 
energies with the same relish as he parted with money. Like his fiction, it is 
populated by roundheads who plot and oppress, and cavaliers who serve honour 
and justice. Mean spirits wage eternal war on freedom and tolerance, not in 
ideological terms but through events and emotions which either unite or divide 
his characters: jealousy, hate, ambition on the one hand; loyalty, comradeship 
and love on the other.

But while the ultimate victory of the cavaliers is not in doubt, it comes at a 
price. There are casualties: just as Antony lost Adèle, so D'Artagnan is 
separated from Constance, Monte-Cristo from Mercedes, and Margot from La Mole. 
Dumas is less than optimistic about the notion that love conquers all, and he 
makes us aware that the true enemy of human happiness is not Milady or Cromwell 
but the persistence of evil. Not even the Musketeers can prevent the execution 
of Charles I. But Charles on the scaffold has murmured 'Remember' and the 
Musketeers do not forget. They return 10 years later, bring down Cromwell and 
restore Charles II to his throne. Like them, Dumas did not believe in fate. He 
accepted that villainy is ineradicable, that some battles won't be won. But 
villains are mortal and their sordid designs can be spiked. Dantès, that modern 
hero, visits retribution on his false friends without using their methods. He 
doesn't betray or murder them: he merely pushes them down the slope of their 
own ambition. When Dumas visited the past, he applied the same principle. Vigny 
had said that history is "a novel written by the people". Dumas's historical 
novels were written for the people. He taught the French to mistrust the 
privileged fleur-de-lis, the self-serving Phrygian cap of the French Revolution 
and the Second Empire's imperial bee, and to prefer instead the awkward, 
unkillable cockerel. What he described in fact was not Frenchness at all, but a 
simple generosity of spirit. His heroes have travelled the world carrying the 
message that cavaliers have more fun than roundheads, and no novelist has ever 
done so much for friendship.

Yet there have been plenty of carping roundheads who wince at his blunders (he 
thought he might send Milady to Botany Bay a century and a half before Cook 
landed there) or who simply don't believe he could have written, or even 
dictated, all the books he published. To take one example: between March 1844 
and August 1845, he wrote and published The Three Musketeers, The Count of 
Monte-Cristo, Twenty Years After and La Reine Margot. In February 1845 he 
successfully sued a journalist who accused him of running a 'fiction factory' 
staffed by hacks who churned out books which he merely signed. He admitted 
using secretaries and collaborators, who nowadays would be researchers, story 
consultants or script editors. But he always acknowledged them and counted his 
most efficient lieutenant, Auguste Maquet, as a friend. Certainly, to help a 
struggling author, he sometimes added his own name to the title page (his name 
sold anything). It is also likely that on rare occasions, when up against a 
deadline, he sent a Maquet chapter to the printer unread, but unrevised Maquet 
is unmistakable - flat and limp and proof that Dumas did indeed write all those 
books. The 'Dumas touch' - pace, humour, atmosphere - is unmistakeable.

Dumas was a master of what Schopp calls the 'aesthetics of speed'. A Dumas 
novel may look intimidatingly long, but it isn't, for he is read as he wrote: 
fast. He begins with a date and a place (La Reine Margot starts: 'On Monday 18 
August 1572, there was a splendid fête at the Louvre') and then guides us 
through the crowd, like a genial host at a party. On that side, black hearts; 
in the middle, waverers; and on ours (with Dumas we know which side we're on) 
Monte Cristo or D'Artagnan - the young, four-square, innocent victims of 
plotters who grind personal or political axes. When attacked, they defend 
themselves with wit and blade as they dash from adventure to setback, from 
treachery to fightback, until they reach a crisis which is resolved by a deus 
ex machina and a textbook Aristotelian peripeteia. The colours are primary - 
black, white and gore - and the writing manly and plain, a tool for showing, 
not an instrument for describing.

Dumas's style is best defined not in terms of language at all but as sheer 
narrative nerve. It is not the ability to catch the eye with a fine phrase but 
to make the heart miss a beat through the visual quality of the storytelling. 
If Dantès's meeting with the abbé Faria stays in the mind's eye, how can we 
resist the Dumas who took a paragraph of the Memoirs of La Rochefoucauld and 
whipped it up into the 14 breathless chapters which tell how D'Artagnan foils 
Milady and rescues the Queen's diamond studs? Stendhal, Balzac and Flaubert 
were greater artists and are admired, even revered. But Dumas's art and his 
personality are inseparable, and he is loved.

After returning from Italy, he continued to spend words, money and energy 
freely. In February 1866, the Goncourt brothers, not the most charitable of 
observers, recorded a visit from Dumas, dressed in

"a white tie and a waistcoat, also white, hugely fat, perspiring, puffing and 
blowing, and in roistering good spirits. He is just back from Austria, Hungary, 
Bohemia . . . He talks of Budapest where he had a play put on in Hungarian, of 
Vienna where the Emperor loaned him a room in his palace to give a lecture. He 
talks of his novels, his contribution to the drama, of plays which the Comédie 
Fran¿aise refuses to stage, of a novel which has been banned, a performing 
licence for a play which he cannot obtain, and then of a restaurant he is 
thinking of opening on the Champs-Elysées. A personality as large as the man, 
but overflowing with unselfconscious good humour and twinkling with wit."

In reality, he was now beginning to lose the knack, and La Terreur prussienne 
(1867), which warned France of the imminent Prussian threat, was his last bow. 
He continued to write but had outlived his imagination. After a stroke, he 
lingered for a time before dying in 1870 at Puys, near Dieppe, in the home of 
his son, author of La Dame aux camélias. He was buried in the local cemetery 
but, after resistance from the mayor of Villers-Cotteràts, the coffin was 
transferred to his birthplace in 1872. In his bicentenary year, he was moved 
again, to the Panthéon, resting-place of Voltaire, Rousseau, Zola and Hugo.

Villers-Cotteràts protested, saying Dumas had expressed a wish to be buried 
with his ancestors. The move was interpreted as a snub to civic pride and a 
blow to its tourist trade; threats were made to kidnap his remains. But the 
Government declared Dumas a national treasure, deserving of the Republic's 
gratitude, and promised compensation in the form of cash for new cultural 
facilities in Villers-Cotter¿ts. The literary cavaliers spoke up for him but 
the roundheads found him unworthy of the honour, complaining of his slack 
style, overproduction and populist tendencies. Jack Lang, the former minister 
of culture, hesitated, but thought, given Dumas's ancestry, that the proposal 
would improve race relations and give a suitable signal to the whole 
Francophone commonwealth. Dumas, having in his lifetime been refused honours 
and a seat in the French Academy, would have been amused to think that his 
bones had become holy relics. His true monument, however, is his literary 
longevity.

David Coward's A History of French Literature: From Chanson de Geste to Cinema 
came out last year. He teaches at Leeds University.

· To read more online essays from the current edition of the London Review of 
Books visit theLRB <http://www.lrb.co.uk/>. The extensive online archive of 
essays from the past includes Alan Bennett's Diary and much more.
 