
I must admit I am no longer a regular viewer of The Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>. This is not because I 
fall into the category of unequivocal hater or nostalgic purist. The show is 
staffed by some of the smartest comedy writers around, and lesser minds would 
collapse in a pool of their own drool if asked to write fresh material for a 
show that has aired for two decades. The reason I don’t watch it is primarily 
because I take for granted that it will always exist.


As a lapsed viewer, I am probably the target audience for last night’s 
episode, Simprovised, which featured a gimmick coda in which Homer Simpson took 
live, pre-screened phone calls through the magic of motion-capture technology. 
What better way to shake me out of my apathy than to promise a 
never-before-attempted high-wire act?

The episode, while not the main event, was a vintage Simpsons story. Once 
again, Homer discovers he has a special talent, harking back to the times he 
has become a boxer, astronaut, bootlegger and sports mascot. Here, he finds 
that he has a knack for improvisational comedy. As usual, Homer faces a moral 
quandary, as he is tempted to use Moe as a plant for a premise suggestion. And, 
as is often the case, Lisa is Homer’s compass, pleading with him to retain his 
dignity – whatever’s left of it, anyway.

Homer in the flesh – The Simpsons announce their first live show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/17/homer-in-the-flesh-the-simpsons-announce-their-first-live-show>
The wacky live bit at the end was a bit like an improv premise. Wisely, the 
producers leaned as far into the surreal nature of the concept as possible. 
Pre-animated characters walked past Homer at his desk, while his whole body, 
save for his mouth and eyes, never moved. Bender from Futurama strolled past 
holding up a sign that read “Bring back Futurama … again”, while Bart rushed 
behind his dad’s desk and emerged with his jeans. Homer’s mouth movements 
occasionally matched up to the dialogue, but for the most part, the words 
drifted away from their ostensible source. Voice actor Dan Castellaneta proved 
the veracity of the live TV claims by referencing the Toronto Blue Jays/Texas 
Rangers baseball brawl for the benefit of the west coast broadcast — on the 
east coast, it was a dig at the Drake Saturday Night Live episode.

In the east-coast feed, a caller named Hannah asked Homer who he preferred – 
Lenny or Carl. Perfectly in character, Homer responded that he doesn’t know 
which one is which. Over on the west coast, Homer answered a question about 
Donald Trump, and told the caller that he supports Bernie Sanders. This might 
be the first time an animated character has endorsed a presidential candidate, 
unless I am forgetting the time Fred Flintstone backed Barry Goldwater. 
However, Homer went on to praise Sanders’ chicken, and recommend that we show 
him respect by calling him “Colonel”.

The responses were funny enough – the Homer voice is just intrinsically 
amusing – but nothing earth-shattering. The humour couldn’t distract from the 
novelty of Homer Simpson actually talking to real people during an episode of 
the show. Now, we, the television viewers, know that the boundaries between us 
and our entertainment are getting smaller.

For everyone used to the perfect delivery and crisp diction of animated 
characters, it was remarkable to hear the voice of Homer Simpson trip on his 
words and mix in a few umm’s and ahh’s here and there. Even this brief segment 
was seriously labour-intensive, but it’s only a matter of time before live 
animation broadcasts such as this become commonplace. I can’t help but think 
about the Black Mirror episode The Waldo Moment, in which a performance-capture 
character becomes a politician (and later an animated dictator). Cartoons might 
not actually dupe us into voting for them – I’m sure there’s a rule in most 
countries banning pixels from holding public office – but as our technological 
sophistication improves, there’s no reason to assume that animation and live 
actors can’t coexist in real time for our amusement. Going further, it’s 
inevitable that iconic characters such as Homer will be replicated as 
intelligent, responsive computer programmes that people can pay good money to 
talk to whenever they want. How soon until we can create a version of Homer 
that sounds just like Castellaneta, retains the character’s personality and can 
think and improvise jokes for itself? If we can make a computer play chess, 
can’t we also make it say “D’oh”?

During the live segment, Homer off-handedly joked that The Simpsons will never 
end. It doesn’t give me much incentive to keep tuning in after this stunt, but 
he’s probably not far off. Even when Castellaneta ceases to be able to play the 
character, there will be ways to keep him around. Homer Simpson will outlive us 
all – in the landfills where 20 years of discarded merchandise is kept, and 
inside the hard drives and servers that process his image. I can’t decide if 
that’s comforting or terrifying.
 