
It's been the most palpable, pitiful lack ever since newspapers started their 
own websites. You could tell, from ABC print copy counts, how many physical 
papers you were selling. You could calculate, from National Readership Surveys, 
how many people were reading your words. But there was no agreed way of 
evaluating the visitors who clicked onto your site every day. And since the 
point of gathering such data was to help sell advertising and raise revenue, 
who could wonder that digital ads were only raising maybe a tenth of their 
print equivalents?

But now, a giant step for mediakind. The NRS, adding more mass surveying, is 
publishing quarterly figures that put newsstand and cyberspace together. Is 
print reading declining? Are we about to perform more obsequies over the 
written word? No. This total picture pulsates with life and, often, growth.

Take the Guardian and the Observer, happily enough. The monthly reach of the 
two titles combined, on the net and in print, is 9,571,000. That's more than the
Telegraph and Sunday Telegraph (9,459,000); more than the Indy and Sindy 
(5,834,000); and much more than the Times and Sunday Times, nestling behind a 
paywall (7,928,000). A dominant lead: those who see a digital world supplanting 
the presses for ever will find plenty to cheer them.

Perhaps, at first sight, the redtop tabloids, making big money from 
cover-price sales, seem to dominate the market as before. TheSun – with 
17,793,000 readers, only 10% of them online – is still just top of the shop. 
But in terms of progress online, theGuardian (with nearly six readers clicking 
on to the digital edition for every five readers in print), theTelegraph and the
Independent are strongly placed; and titles that haven't made much of an effort 
look bereft. Where does thePeople (with only 5.3% of its readers online) go 
next? Or the shrinkingStar and the Express, with 8.1% and 8.2% respectively? 
Can the Lebedevs be buoyant about anEvening Standard, with the obvious website 
potential to dominate London, boasting a mere 10% online? Why are some 
managements reaching for the future, while others huddle in their tents?

At which point, all the euphoria needs nuancing. The NRS, like the ABC, exists 
to serve advertisers. And it isn't too clear that ad agencies are yet bowled 
over when online and print figures are rolled into one. ABC in America has done 
that for some time, but the latest statistics (covering the first half of 2012) 
show US papers losing $25 in print ad revenue for every lone greenback they 
gain online. Though Madison Avenue men are pleased enough to praise online's 
potential, they seem pretty sour when it comes to paying more than a fraction 
of what print can command – and analysts stand in line behind them, asserting 
that print reading time far exceeds quickly clicking from page to page.

In short, though newspapers are finding a formidable new readership market 
online, they still haven't been able to monetise it properly. Will that get 
easier as merged counts become more familiar? Let's hope that the NRS has made 
a decisive breakthrough.

But note how integrated figuring also raises vexed questions, such as 
pluralism and the horrors of Murdoch hegemony. The combined readership of the
Mail and Guardian (his two doughtiest critics) leaves the combined total of the 
Sun, Times and Sunday Times far behind. Free versus paid-for online access? 
Free draws big numbers, but can it raise enough ad money to mind the gaps? It's 
a debate as yet; no conclusions. But at least the debate just got more 
interesting.

 Taking the wraps off


The ABC circulation medals for Olympic August were largely putty and paste. 
But theDaily Mirror (under its new editor) managed a modest rise on July. So 
did theDaily Telegraph and the i as well as six Sundays – including the Observer
. And gold goes to theTimes, which put on nearly 4,000 via the wheeze of 
wrapping itself in a 2012 picture and flooding the streets of London with 
"souvenir" editions. Smart thinking, soon copied; and as legacy as they come …
 