
When assessing Australia’s prospects for retaining the Ashes in 2015 and the 
players likely to carry out the task, the only truly instructive way of looking 
forward is by taking a watchful glance backwards.

It’s almost jarringly soon, the next series in England. Seventeen months’ time 
and they’re locked and loaded again. But if you jump back that far in reverse, 
you would find a fragile and transitory Australia about to embark on a 
three-Test home series against South Africa and Sri Lanka. The surgery since 
has been savage. Putting aside the departures of Messrs Ponting and Hussey, 
names such as Cowan, Wade, Quiney, Hilfenhaus, Hastings, Bird and Hughes have 
all since slipped off the team sheet. In some cases that will probably be for 
good.Ryan Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-harris> didn’t feature 
at all that summer, so James Pattinson and Mitchell Starc, both subsequently 
injured, stepped into the breach.

If you’ll excuse the jolt, jumping back the same distance again is equally 
disorienting. An even less convincing incarnation of the Australian side took 
on England and lost badly in 2010-11. That series and year is now filed in the 
same shoebox of memories as Lady Gaga’s meat dress and the emergence of the Tea 
Party. Australia lost 3-1. Marcus North, Xavier Doherty, Doug Bollinger, 
Michael Beer, Usman Khawaja and the rawest, earliest model of Steve Smith were 
there. All took their turn swimming against a vicious riptide and either washed 
ashore on Reality Island or drifted further out to sea.

With those two leaps in mind, drawing inferences about the make-up of the 2015 
squad is fraught. Some, perhaps all, of the unbeatable XI who stayed thick this 
summer will face their own challenges in the meantime, and none is a truly 
guaranteed starter. Test tours away against South Africa, Pakistan, India and 
the West Indies, and a World Cup, dot the path. Sides have crashed, crumbled 
and then pulled themselves out of the mire in less time. This side has, to be 
honest. CoachDarren Lehmann <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-lehmann> 
knows they have to start winning away from home and said as much in the 
aftermath of the Sydney Test.

This summer proved how much a side can benefit from the glaring weaknesses of 
its opponent, but a more instructive juxtaposition is placing recent Australian 
success alongside the winless travels to India and England that preceded it. 
They will now encounter a South African team loaded with A-graders and with 
something to prove; the Proteas have been far from impressive at home against 
Australia for 20 years now.

Following that, the obligatory visit to India could be just as sobering as the 
last, and a truncated tour of the Caribbean on the eve of the Ashes can’t hope 
to convince of much at all across a pair of Tests. It’s a piece of scheduling 
that calls to mind the journalist David Halberstam being told by an editor that 
he must submit stories of 600 words. In response he bristled that there were 
two types of stories, those that merited much less than 600 words and those on 
which he would like to write many more, “but there is nothing about which I 
would like to write exactly 600 words”.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> lovers have a right to feel the 
same way about the scourge of the two-Test series.

By the time the 2015 Ashes tour rolls around, Michael Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke> will be 34, and his ailing 
back maybe double that in medical terms. Wicketkeeper Brad Haddin will enter 
the twilight of his 38th year and opener Chris Rogers the same. If still a 
going concern, Shane Watson will turn 34 and probably have one eye on a 
cryogenics brochure, while 35-year-old Ryan Harris will either be completely 
clapped out or a sports science miracle. The twin turbines of Johnson and 
Siddle should fare better; contrasting fitness regimes hopefully still reaping 
similar rewards.

Much sexier to ponder are the players who will breach the walls of this squad 
over the next year and earn a cap. Alex Doolan’s introduction seems imminent 
and he will have closely observed the path of his Tasmanian captainGeorge Bailey
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/george-bailey> thus far. The two share a 
similar body of prep work at first-class level.

Queenslander Chris Lynn has a deep, laconic drawl at odds with the fluent and 
attractive batting that has taken him to afirst-class average of 43.25 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/usa/content/player/326637.html> from 26 
first-class games. He will be 25 by the next Ashes, and how his name is not 
already front and centre in prognostications is a bit of a mystery.

Tasmanian grafter Jordan Silk is developing slowly but surely. His 11 
first-class games have reaped four centuries and an average of 42, which would 
be the baseline figure for consideration in an ideal world. Silk’s fielding 
adds more runs by taking them away from the opposition. New South Welshman Nic 
Maddinson remains highly rated by selectors. He will be 23 and by then may have 
wedded some steeliness to the eye-catching strokeplay.

Of the seasoned and pre-worn options, Cameron White appears to age in reverse 
and will still only be 32, while Phillip Hughes, at 27, still won’t even be at 
the midpoint of his intriguing career. Ed Cowan might need to move mountains 
even to rate a mention.

The bowling always seems to be of less concern while Australia boasts such 
varied pace options, though it would be a brave gambler who staked anything on 
predicting Nathan Lyon’s understudy. Should Haddin fade or call it quits in the 
next 18 months, Matthew Wade will be pushed by Peter Nevill and Tim Paine to 
claim the gloves in an open field that also includes the nomadic Ryan Carters.

It is hard to accurately gauge the personality of this team even in the 
present. The players beam when they speak of the joy Darren Lehmann has brought 
back to the dressing room, but then this team also stared down, lipped off and 
mercilessly piled on top of England until they couldn’t get up. The smiles came 
afterwards.

There is a certain robustness required for that, and it would be accurate to 
say that a collective confidence comes when players are sure of the 
capabilities and intentions of the teammates beside them. It’s what makes the 
George Bailey debate so interesting. Do you carry a batsman averaging 26 for as 
long as the net results are positive, or run the risk of disrupting a thriving 
ecosystem?

Next to the bustling share house of Big Bash cricket now in view, this 
unbeaten and unchanged Test side takes on monastic qualities. Uprooting its 
furniture will be no easy decision, but many more like it await.
 