
Twenty years ago, I was on the phone with a school friend. I was reading out 
something I had typed in blinking green Word Perfect text on my mother’s 
enormous beige home computer.

“‘His love was not even worth the paper this is printed on’,” I read.

“That’s terrible. Delete it,” the friend said.

After a dab of rewriting, that became my first book, Seahorses. A book deal 
was cut within six months of that phone conversation and I went from being a 
16-year-old style hack who went out all the time, to getting bogged down in the 
mainstream entertainment industry with my incredibly dark adult novel about 
child abuse. I have no idea how I came up with it given that in 1994 I was like 
a cross between Kim Kardashian and a Bratz doll. The title was an in-joke: I 
promised my friend I would call it that because we wanted to get rich and live 
together in a Soho yuppie loft full of fish tanks containing seahorses.

I wasn’t even consciously interested in writing fiction, but somehow the 
seasonal suspension of ordinary business, the uncanny slowing of time, the 
suburban silence and chilled darkness all fostered my creativity, clarity and 
focus. The novel arose magically, without any forethought, struggle or doubt. 
That is what happens when you stop over-thinking and allow your mind to relax 
in silence. It was a Zen moment which led to tangible worldly gain: the perfect 
trajectory.

I’ve loved Christmas ever since, and always try to be alone for it – 
preferably starting the festive season the day after Halloween and finishing on 
International Women’s Day the following March. I don’t want to see anyone, go 
anywhere or do anything. I just want to stay in, fairy lights twinkling, and 
wallow in the sense of stillness and waiting as the year deepens, bottoms out 
and rounds off. Best of all is that blissful week of strange, thick nothingness 
betweenChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> and new 
year.

Uninterrupted, alone, a writer can collect and smooth out their ideas, see 
what new thoughts and ideas bubble up, complete the stubs of half-finished work 
at leisure and watch pirated box sets of Xena Warrior Princess, Buffy, and The 
L Word bought from a knock-off DVD market in Beijing – sorry, I mean meditate 
on emerging intellectual hypotheses. Every writer dreams of carving out space 
and time to dedicate completely to their work. Last year I used this time to 
complete myadventure story Esha Ex 
<http://bidisha-online.blogspot.co.uk/2014/09/introducing-esha-ex.html>. The 
year before, I worked on my forthcoming book about asylum seekers and refugees.

I have learned over the past two decades that Christmas need not be about 
other people, giving, family or Jesus – it can be about oneself. Still, I know 
that the overwhelming majority of women do not have this luxury and that 
Christmas is their busiest time. Some may say I am like a cat lady that does 
not have a cat: a nearly 40-year-old celibate spinster who lives with her 
mother, never moved out or grew up, has no responsibilities or expenditures, 
and sleeps in a single bed in the bedroom she’s had since she was seven. That 
is true in factual terms, but I prefer to think of myself as a repository of 
spiritual power which concentrates and sets, like a particularly dense 
Christmas pudding, at this time of year.

I’m writing this in the same room, in the same house, on the same street that 
I wrote Seahorses two decades ago, although the novel is long out of print and 
we changed the carpet to an open-weave hessian. I’ve stacked fairy lights and 
candles in a glorious fire hazard of inspiring secular spirituality and made a 
wreath using chicken wire entwined with holly from the garden. Hanging from the 
centre of the wreath is a little silver doe – for were I a knight, that would 
be my emblem. This house, this period and this tradition of solitude symbolise 
a core healing and regeneration without which I would begin the year 
psychically depleted and professionally wrongfooted.

Maybe that’s pathetic. There’s an alternative take on this whole story, which 
is that early success somehow damaged me and I am too otherworldly to survive 
in the harsh adult realm. I do sometimes contemplate returning to writing 
novels and wonder if I could conjure up the unthinking ease and natural 
momentum I felt in December 1994. Maybe now’s the perfect time to find out.
 