
To give graduates and school leavers the golden rules of making it in the 
music-industry is not easy. There are principles you can follow but it is a 
chaotic arena where the cliché 'there are no rules' is true. But that's why 
it's always been exciting; you can improvise and explore the business and 
change your plan. If you want to get involved then you should. Plenty of people 
will tell you not to but don't take no for an answer.

Online is a brave new world where music is consumed in many and different 
ways. If you can marry an understanding of where the business is going with a 
respect for what's worked in the past then you'll be on the right road.

As the record industry changes (shrinks might be a more honest description) 
different areas cope better than others. Look at who's still smiling. While 
there's still a lot of money moving around, people are buying fewer CDs and 
tickets and it's harder for labels and artists to justify investing money in 
touring. To be safe I'd advise multi-tasking. If you decide to get a job as an 
AnR, while managing a new artist and DJ-ing at the weekends then you'll have a 
better chance of paying bills.

If you are a creative person with intellectual copyright to protect then get a 
good lawyer before you do anything else (even if they're expensive). If you 
want to work in other areas then it may be less important but it never hurts to 
have someone at the end of the phone. Don't be afraid to ask them questions – 
they could be instrumental in finding you a manager, a record deal and creating 
opportunities.

What makes giving advice difficult is that everyone's situations are 
different. That said I can try to pass on some wisdom that I have picked up 
from my journey so far. Other things are borrowed from films, authors and Bob 
Dylan. I will probably digress with #generalbeingagoodpersonstuff but I think 
that is important in your work life.

Here we go, deep breath:

Get Involved. Collaborate. Communicate. Prioritise. Embrace criticism. Get the 
first round in. Generate your own opportunities then exploit them to the 
fullest. Don't wait for something to happen to you. Be a yes-man. Under 
promise, over deliver. Get there early. Only leave if the job is done or it's 
pub o'clock. Make the tea. Don't make bad tea – people will dislike and 
distrust you if you make them disgusting tea. Look people in the eye. Be 
modest. If in doubt do it. Ask forgiveness, not permission. Try, fail, try 
again, fail better. Nothing is a waste of time; you learnt something. Call your 
mother.

Apologise if you misbehave or let someone down but never apologise for the 
quality of your work – let other people criticise it first. If in doubt pick up 
the phone; emails are not good for building a rapport, you need to meet people. 
Don't believe 'bar-chat', people will promise you the world with a drink in 
their hand. Have meetings in hotels, not pubs, and always stay one drink 
behind. Give people a lift home.

Ask the advice of people in and outside your industry. Be polite to everyone – 
you don't know who you are talking to or what kind of day they're having. Hold 
doors open for people. If you have to push the door open, walk through then 
hold it open – don't be that guy trying to hold it open while still on the 
outside. Listen to music made before the invention of computers. Don't mix your 
drinks.

If you went to university, don't worry it wasn't a waste of time. A lot of the 
academic hoops you had to jump through (deadlines, blagging, skim-reading) are 
useful in show business. If you didn't go to university don't worry, it would 
probably have been a waste of time. Don't overly specialise – multi-task. Don't 
stop learning just because you've left education. Learn a new instrument or a 
new language. It will keep you fresh and humble. Find out about the RBMA. Study 
sound (Metropolis in West London do a great engineering/production programme). 
Try to learn from someone you admire. Learn to DJ – DJs are more popular than 
musicians.

Even if you are broke, keep a bottle of bubbly in the fridge and think of 
something to celebrate. Don't go on a reality TV show. Don't go on a talent 
show. Don't talk about carbs. Don't ride a bike without gears or brakes. Call 
your mother. Don't wear clothes with writing on unless you are a catwalk model, 
remember it's not a fashion show.

Try to remember people's names. Go for a walk. Do one thing a day well, rather 
than five things badly. Choose your battles. Carry a box of matches. Check your 
drafts (you may not have clicked send on that email that you say you definitely 
sent). Check your spam for important emails. Go when you can, not when you 
must. Don't fear anyone; they're probably just as scared of you. A person's 
behaviour says more about them than their feelings about you. Don't be a hero. 
Don't place money and possessions over experiences and creativity. Persevere 
and don't be deterred by anything. You might have to wait a while for your day 
in the sun.

It is all about the journey.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 