
Our ageing society demands big changes in the way we live longer lives. As 
your piece (“Our life in three stages won’t last much longer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/04/reaching-100-new-norm-transform-very-shape-of-life>
”, Comment) suggests, we need to “work, learn and play” in different ways and 
different orders across the life course. But many of our institutions and 
policymakers have barely started to grasp the changes required.

Ageism is rife across our society. Employers, for example, could make much 
more use of older people’s experience, knowledge and skills by offering 
flexible working opportunities.

Similarly, businesses should look at marketing better to older people, 
innovating products and services and encouraging older staff and thereby 
customers. New savings products and new types of homes could help us manage the 
big costs and transitions across generations. Government could lead a national 
conversation that unites, rather than divides, all ages on the issue of the 
century.
Stephen Burke
Director, United for All Ages
Happisburgh
Norfolk

In response to the uplifting article about longevity, I have gone through the 
rigorous selection process and have an unconditional offer to do a postgraduate 
research masters at Edgehill University.

I have been a carer for more than 20 years, I have just had my 70th birthday 
and have discovered the disadvantage of this in attempting to obtain funding 
support for my studies. I am quite nonplussed by the blatant ageism in the 
criteria, especially of the much trumpeted new government finance for older 
students. I would appreciate any comments and advice from wise old – and 
younger – owls.
Jane Abrams
Wallasey

Lynda Gratton and Andrew Scott are right to focus on the challenges that face 
our society as more of us live to 100 and beyond.

The government needs to think less about pension cuts and develop a plan to 
upgrade the skills of an ageing workforce regularly and to ensure that we all 
share the benefits of increased longevity.

The first step should be a system of publicly funded work breaks of up to 
three years to give people a second chance at higher education, or to retrain 
or to switch careers.

In our book, Man-Made 
<https://www.routledge.com/Man-Made-Why-So-Few-Women-Are-in-Positions-of-Power/Tutchell-Edmonds/p/book/9781472432124>
, we show how this policy would be of particular benefit to women who face 
discrimination because of the outdated notion that taking any break from work 
is anomalous and unreasonable.

But paid career breaks are also needed to enhance the lives of men who, in a 
working life of 60 years, will certainly want time off the treadmill.
John Edmonds
Mitcham
Eva Tutchell
Teddington
 