
I trained as a GP in an affluent rural practice. Often our patients were 
well-informed scientists, teachers or university lecturers. They did extensive 
research on the unusual ailment or the latest groundbreaking medication.

As a trainee GP with little experience, it was often daunting to manage these 
intense patient-led encounters. Whether prescribing a statin for high 
cholesterol or referring for investigations, everything involved negotiation 
with the patient. It was immaterial that there were 10-15 minutes allocated to 
each encounter: the consultation finished when a plan was reached.

It would seem this is not such a bad model of care. It ensures patient 
compliance and makes for a better doctor-patient relationship, once the doctor 
has willingly given up a paternalistic "doctor knows best" attitude in favour 
of patient-centred holistic care.

The case of Ashya King and his parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> brings home the difficulties 
when health beliefs collide and there is a breakdown in the doctor-patient 
relationship. Sadly, this is not an isolated case. There are countless patients 
who feel alienated in hospitals and GP surgeries because we are disconnected, 
rushed, or dismissive.

When I moved to an urban practice, I found that suggesting different options 
often led to confusion. Many of my older patients asked what I would recommend 
and accepted it at that. However, it would be easy to be sucked into the 
stereotype that poorer or working-class patients are not well informed and need 
a health professional to make decisions for them. This is simply not the case. 
There is no typical patient who walks through the door.

I have known James for a few years. He suffers from frequent severe migraines. 
These are debilitating and he has to stay in bed for days during an attack. He 
has been referred to occupational health and is being performance-managed at 
his workplace.

He has tried various migraine medications and even Botox injections, which are 
thought to help some people, without improvement in his symptoms.

He is keen to explore the possibility of closure of a patent foramen ovale 
(PFO). This is a hole between the two upper chambers of the heart that is 
normally present in a foetus and closes soon after birth. In some cases, it 
remains open but does not usually cause problems. Some studies have suggested a 
link between PFO and migraines, with reduction in frequency after closure, 
though other studies have not confirmed this association. Research continues in 
this area.

The National Institute for Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
and Care Excellence says there is inadequate evidence on the efficacy of this 
procedure, which consists of passing a device through a vessel in the groin 
into the heart to close the hole, and also a small risk of complications.

I discuss all this with James who has talked it through with his neurologist 
and is about to see a cardiologist. He has high hopes that this treatment will 
help him. He has read a wealth of information on the internet, a lot of it in 
forums, blogs or testimonials. But I remain cautious and talk about a lack of 
robust trials and meta-analysis. Somewhere along the line, I feel that we are 
no longer on the same page.

As health professionals, it is important that we take a step back to reflect 
when we reach that point. AsDavid Pendleton 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780192632883.do>, a psychologist who has 
written a lot on the consultation theory that is taught to medical students, 
said: "Consultation is the central act of medicine which deserves to be 
understood."

The King case may not change how we consult generally but it will certainly 
affect situations where there are different religious or health beliefs, 
children, or adisabled patient who is a ward of court or lacks capacity to make 
their own decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/05/councils-struggle-deprivation-liberty-tenfold-rise-mentally-vulnerable-patients>
.
 