
In Bogotá, Colombia's sprawling capital, two young men named Bernardo and 
Oscar spend each Wednesday driving the streets on the lookout for gangs of 
children. The search rarely takes long. Once the two men spot a gang they have 
not met before they park the car, get out and broadcast US hip hop from a sound 
system built into the boot.

This is a rare and impressive spectacle and typically the street children will 
come for a closer look, giving Bernardo and Oscar the opportunity to introduce 
themselves and chat for a while before driving off. They return the next week, 
this time with a pristine football. They return again the week after and the 
week after that, each time with a modest offering of interest, and each time 
incrementally building a relationship of familiarity and trust.

The initiative is part of a bold plan to engage the children who live and work 
on the streets of Bogotá and gradually reintegrate them into mainstream 
society. If Bernardo and Oscar's plan works, after two to three months of 
meetings they will encourage some or all of the gang to take part in numerous 
YMCA education projects, which give lessons in music, drama and graffiti. 
Whilst enrolment is unlikely to make an immediate difference to the young 
person's lifestyle and prospects, the project organisers see it as a 
significant step for demonstrating to marginalised and abandoned youths that 
opportunities exist besides the petty crime and violence of the street.

The YMCA have set themselves no modest task. It is estimated that between five 
and ten thousand teenagers live on the street in Bogota, and thousands more 
earn a living there rather than going to school. However to see the scale of 
the problem it is not necessary to gather official statistics; a short walk 
through one of city's southern districts will suffice. Very rarely are you not 
interrupted by a young person selling lottery tickets or cigarettes; a 
frequently used bin does not have to be watched for long before a child will 
arrive to search through its contents, hoping to find a scrap of metal or 
plastic that can be recycled for cash.

The unseen but widely reported elements of their lifestyles are even more 
concerning – drug taking, particularly sniffing glue, is the accepted leisure 
activity, the supply of small arms is plentiful and gang membership and loyalty 
is essential.

Despite the fact the thousands of its young people fall out of society, 
reaching out to these people and preventing their slide out of mainstream is 
not on government's agenda, even at a local level. The work of YMCA and a 
handful of other NGOs is done without the financial or logistical support of 
the state. The absence of a concerted drive to help these young people reflects 
the prevailing attitude towards the ubiquitous gangs of street children in 
Bogota. At best they are seen as an undesirable sub-group who are undeserving 
and unresponsive to help and at worst they are seen as residue; the unwanted 
grime that collects around the edges of an otherwise smoothly running machine.

This attitude has been taken to morbid extremes in recent years, most notably 
in the late 1990s with the hiring of mercenary 'death squads' by groups of 
merchants wishing to cleanse their street of threatening gangs of youths that 
might dissuade consumers. Reports of these terror attacks have diminished in 
recent years, however remnants of the prejudices that made such extreme actions 
possible remain. Street children are still most commonly referred to as los 
desechables - the disposables.

For many the ubiquitous street children represent a side of Colombia that the 
country is keen to move away from. Indeed, there is much in Bogota and Colombia 
that would surprise those who associate it with political instability, 
international drugs trade, corruption and kidnapping. The polished plazas and 
imposing institutions of central Bogota have more in common with its North 
American or European counterparts than developing world cities and in the past 
five years the Colombian economy has experienced strong economic growth and 
international investment, particularly from the US, with whom they share a free 
trade agreement.

Also the government of Alvaro Uribe has won a second term on the back of what 
is perceived as successful attempts to crack down on illegal armed groups and 
the drugs trade. After forty years of intermittent civil war, many in Colombia 
are keen to move forward to a more civilised future, and see street children as 
irrelevant to the progress of mainstream society.

But rather than represent a sub-group of a progressive society intent on 
dragging its feet, the street children of Bogotá are a cruelly inevitable 
result of the political instability that has dominated the country for decades 
and has been founded on the massive disparity between the rich and poor.

Despite strong economic growth Colombia currently ranks 15th in the world in 
terms of wealth distribution (after Bolivia and Haiti). The disproportionate 
division of wealth in Colombia has traditionally manifested itself as a divide 
between the urban rich and rural poor, however as the profits from the 
international cocaine trade were used to increase the scope and severity of 
political violence in the countryside so mass migration to the urban centres 
followed, heightening the awkward proximity between the rich and poor and 
bringing economic inequality into sharp focus.

In many areas of Bogotá the population has increased exponentially since the 
1980s and the government has been unwilling or unable to develop infrastructure 
to keep up with the increase. Rather than share in the amenities and structure 
of city life, the displaced rural poor have formed a belt of rustic poverty on 
the cities southern fringe.

In Bosa, the southernmost district, the vestiges of city life and the state 
are almost entirely absent. Rather than tarmac the roads are mere dirt tracks, 
down which as many horses travel as do cars. Most of the buildings consist of 
home-made shanty houses and unfinished building sites which diminish in 
frequency until there are nothing but empty fields.

Given the inadequate infrastructure, the lack of any welfare provision and the 
proportion of unskilled rural migrants, the social indicators in Bosa follow a 
predictable pattern – rates of unemployment, crime and poverty are 
exceptionally high and provide the perfect conditions for children abandoning 
education and commencing work on the street.

In Bosa, the number of children eligible for primary school is approximately 
double the number of spaces, resulting in a simple compromise: children either 
go to school in the morning or the afternoon. As a result the amount of 
teaching time is roughly half that of less deprived areas and consigns the 
children to still further disadvantage. Rather than acting as vehicle towards 
social mobility, education is at risk of reinforcing existing inequalities in 
Bogotá. The lack of decent education, and the presence of endemic poverty 
without state support, is the main reason why so many children embark on a life 
of extreme danger and vulnerability on the street,.

The existence of street children are the gangs of street children in Bogotá 
are the cruelly inevitable result of the vast geo-political forces that have 
plagued the country for decades and their ubiquity represent how far the 
country is from achieving anything approaching political unity.

But there are some signs of hope. At the YMCA centre where Barnardo and Oscar 
work, a group of street children are giving a variety performance. These are a 
group that have come to the end of the process started on the street three 
months ago. The show features a mime performance, some hip hop and a fire 
breathing show. It is an undeniably positive spectacle, although what it will 
lead onto in the long term is unclear. What is all too clear for those involved 
is that the collective efforts are dwarfed by the challenges they face. The 
deep division and inequality that persists in Colombian society looks set to 
continue producing young people destined to shoulder the burden of their own 
survival on the margins of society. Until a more radical commitment is made to 
bring the benefits of education and social provision to the poor, the prospect 
of this changing seems remote.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 