
The state of the road heading in is the main reason the Albanian Riviera has 
escaped large-scale tourist development. That and land ownership. The road's 
upgrade, with help from the World Bank, is the first major overhaul since the 
Italian Army built it in the 1940s. It is seen as a local vote winner for a 
population that is close enough to Corfu to know what tourism can bring.
 Countless bays cut into the coast. Photograph: Nick Easen  The cliché that 
this 130km stretch of coastline is one of the last untarnished parts of the 
Mediterranean with deserted beaches is not lost on the deputy mayor of the 
sleepy seaside town of Himara. "Nature is the most important thing here, as 
well as the connection between the mountains and the sea," Stefo Mato says, 
referring to the high karst mountains that kick their feet in the sandy 
shoreline. "But service for tourists needs to get better. There must be more 
things to do here."  Llogora Pass between the Cika mountains and the Ionian 
Sea. Photograph: Nick Easen  Then again, this is precisely why Albania's Ionian 
coast is worth visiting now, before the parasols arrive and the jet skis drown 
out the cricket song. Any intrepid traveller to the region should head straight 
to the top of the Llogora Pass with views of the Cika mountains plunging 910 
metres into the sea. The spectacle encapsulates the real "Mediterranean as it 
once was". Pine trees interspersed with old stone farmhouses and citrus trees 
are all that interrupt the view.
In this coastal region inward investment, especially from overseas, is only 
beginning to trickle in. Land rights still remain an issue especially where the 
best beaches are located. And the Albanian authorities are still in the process 
of handing back property to owners from the pre-Communist era. Bogus title 
deeds and disputes over ownership have also stymied growth.

Endless curves of sand, remote Orthodox monasteries, small family-run 
guesthouses and roadside cafes with fresh trout on the grill are more prevalent 
than gaudy ice-cream boxes and adverts for suntan lotion. The only noticeable 
hoardings are the scarecrow dolls that hang above doorways to ward away the 
evil eye – this includes the unfinished hotels in Saranda.
 An apiarist sells his wares. Photograph: Nick Easen  You are more likely to 
chance upon old women in headscarves and long skirts ushering goats through the 
fragrant maquis than bronzed tourists. And interaction with locals is more 
likely to involve buying honey with roadside apiarists, since the bees here 
have more wild flower species to choose from than anywhere else in Europe.

The only tell-tale signs of old order Albania are the deserted collective 
farms of the Communist era and the concrete bunkers. The country has a grey 
"mushroom" for every four people. Hundreds of thousands dot the landscape 
thanks to Enver Hoxha, the long- term Stalinist dictator who was paranoid of 
invasion from the west.  One of Hoxha's submarine bases on the Riviera. 
Photograph: Nick Easen  Albanians are now using them in novel ways that 
tourists can experience. You can have a seafood supper under a concrete dome in 
Restaurant Bunkere on the seafront at Durres; on the road to Vlora, artists 
have painted their roofs in psychedelic designs. According to legend, the 
designer was placed in a prototype, which was subsequently blasted by a tank. 
The bunker survived, as did its shell-shocked architect – mass production 
began. Nowadays, it costs at least £5,000 to get rid of one of these pillboxes. 
 Looking across the bay at Saranda. Photograph: Nick Easen  "Many Albanians 
lose their virginity in the bunkers, when they are not being used for sheep or 
cattle," says Raimonda Nelku, a development worker with USAID. "They are in the 
Albanian psyche."

Saranda has the reputation of being one of the sunniest spots in Europe with 
more than 290 days of rays a year and midsummer temperatures around 30C. At 
present southern Albania's biggest town looks only partially built with 
half-constructed apartments and hotels scrambling up the hillside. Much of the 
activity is being generated by Albanians working abroad and sending money back 
home.
Here palm trees flank the promenade shading elderly men as they sip their 
espressos, unhurried by the daily tourist influx. Many of whom are Brits, 
coming over on day trips from Corfu. Now they are being encouraged to stay 
longer.
 The glassy waters of the Ionian Sea. Photograph: Nick Easen  A major 
attraction, which even Greek operators are touting, is Butrint, which sits on a 
cliff top overlooking the Greek island a few miles south of town. This UNESCO 
World Heritage site is a 2,500-year-old layer cake that includes a Greek 
colony, a Roman city and a Byzantine bishopric. This is ranked as the biggest 
of its kind, second only to Hagia Sophia in Istanbul.
The fact is only 15% of Butrint has been uncovered, but then that's indicative 
of the country as a whole, according to Nelku, Mato and others. They hope that 
Albania will become "a new Mediterranean love", according to the country's new 
international TV ads.

Getting there

British Airways <http://www.ba.com> flies from London, Gatwick to Tirana's 
Mother Teresa Airport in under three hours from £200 in June.

Where to stay

Hotel Butrinti <http://www.butrintihotel.com>, Saranda: A modern five-star 
hotel on the beachfront, with great balcony views across the bay to Corfu. 
Check out the swimming pool with its Greek columns. £64 - 110 per room per 
night.

Llogora Tourist Village <http://www.llogora.com>: An amazing hotel cradled in 
the pine forests at 1,200 metres, with grazing deer in the actual grounds. 
There are wooden chalets, an indoor pool and great artwork.. £56 - 100 per room 
per night, includes breakfast.

Hotel New York <http://www.hotelnewyork-al.net>, Vlora: Worth it just to see 
the mad mosaic of the Statue of Liberty in the restaurant. Away from the 
downtown noise on the seafront, but still within walking distance of the cafes 
and beach. £40 - £100 including breakfast.
 