
Not long after news breaks that the Independent is to go online only 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/independent-and-independent-on-sunday-closures-confirmed>
, Sarah Sands calls to suggest an interview. “Print can also work,” writes the 
editor of the London Evening Standard in a text. “It’s not all doom and gloom.”

Few would argue that the news coming from the newspaper industry is anything 
but gloomy: falling print readership and disappointing online advertising 
revenues have led to fewer titles and job cuts. After spending tens of millions 
of pounds, owner Evgeny Lebedevclosed the Independent print edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/16/independent-closes-print-titles-national-union-journalists>
 and sold its cheaper offshoot, the i, to regional newspaper group, Johnston 
Press, saying that “the future is digital”. All of which could have been 
awkward for his last remaining print title, the London Evening Standard.

Yet Sands is having none of it. “I think that the death of print has been 
exaggerated,” she says, in her small office in the Kensington headquarters 
shared by the Mail group of newspapers.

A former senior executive at the Mail, the first female editor of the Sunday 
Telegraph, and editor of the London freesheet for four years, Sands is 
well-connected and relentlessly positive, even when not waxing lyrical about 
the glories of the fast-growing capital city.

When I point out the irony of having to go through a “Hallway of Editors” 
filled with portraits of men to get to her office and that the last one, 
symbolically positioned by the lifts going up, is that of Martin Clarke, boss 
of Mail Online, she simply raises an eyebrow. When I ask where her 
camera-confident owner is amid the serried pictures of awards nights and 
charity events on her desk, she gives me a gentle slap rather than a comment.

She offers two models for the future of print: “I would say that there will be 
a role for some print, it may be just as a beautiful steam engine that someone 
owns, a kind of Flying Scotsman … for an owner who loves print.” The Standard 
is an example of the other model, however, with a transport-based distribution 
perfect for the growing numbers of London commuters. “Print can’t work 
everywhere but if you can get the model right to be able to distribute to an 
audience it does,” she says.

The decision in 2009 to turn the then struggling paper into a freesheet 
appears to have paid off. It now makes an estimated £3m operating profit on 
more than 900,000 distributed copies. Its audience of weekday commuters have an 
average age of 37, younger than the national titles, with an equal number of 
men and women, according to the company’s own research. As London grows and 
jobs multiply, so does the Standard, or so Sands hopes.

Yet, its revenues rely almost entirely on print advertising, which is not a 
growth area, and the loss of the Independent, which shared resources with the 
Standard, will come at a cost. Indeed, there are few current or former 
independent staff members who do not believe that the Standard’s bottom line 
has been boosted by sharing resources.

The Standard relied on many of the Independent’s 160-strong editorial staff, 
with a shared back bench and joint efforts for big events such as the Olympics. 
When we meet, some 100 of these people are about to leave and the process of 
what Sands calls “conscious uncoupling” from her own 230 editorial and 
commercial staff has not begun.

It is not easy to get Sands to talk about the impact of the loss of the joint 
sales department and the benefits of charging costs across the papers: three 
times she says “that’s one for Steve”, referring to Steve Auckland, chief 
executive of holding company ESI. At last, she says, “We are not going to 
inherit huge costs.”

As for the dependency on print revenues, she says: “It’s a tough advertising 
market for the whole of the medium so all of us are looking for new revenues.” 
For the Standard this means building on events with new business and film 
awards this year.

For Lebedev, an online-only Independent may boast the gravitas of Robert Fisk 
on the Middle East but the Standard offers access to London’s theatrical and 
power players through its theatre awards and annual Progress 1000 list.

When asked about her relationship with the son of the Russian oligarch who 
bought the Standard and now controls it, there is a pause followed by Sands 
saying she doesn’t want to be “presumptuous”, before adding, “I talk to him a 
lot about the theatre awards. He texts to ask what’s on, what’s on at the 
theatre, what’s good to see.” Everyone, she adds, feels “secure” about the 
Standard.

The morning after the interview, she texts to say her hesitation was because 
she had not wanted to sound “creepy” about Lebedev. “He has always been 
supportive of me and the paper and I am grateful for it. He is owner and I am 
his editor, so I feel a proper sense of duty to him.” There have been rumours, 
of course, that Amol Rajan, the Independent editor,now to be made “editor at 
large” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/18/independent-editor-knew-paper-would-close-on-day-he-took-the-job>
 of the digital edition, could be eyeing her job as well as one in 
broadcasting. Sands is very clear about how much she loves running the paper 
she first joined as a young reporter in 1985. Rajan “is going to be crucial” to 
“get the character of the Independent, particularly on digital”, she says.

Anyone feeling a bit miserable about the future of print should talk to Sands. 
She says someone high up at BuzzFeed told her how important the title’s front 
page was for campaigning: “If you want to get something across it’s unrivalled 
whereas on the internet, it’s an ocean.”

Such power will be useful during the London mayoral election in May. Sands’ 
predecessor Veronica Wadley had been heavily criticised for partisan attacks on 
the Labour candidate Ken Livingstone, and Sands, a good friend of Boris Johnson 
from their Telegraph days, as well as his wife Marina, also supported the 
Conservatives last time. Yet in the run-up to this year’s election, she says 
the Standard will be “scrupulous”, making sure Zac Goldsmith and Sadiq Khan are 
given equal coverage.

On the EU referendum and Brexit, she is in a trickier situation given that 
most of the City backs Remain while her good friend is a leading proponent of 
Leave. Asked for her opinion, she says: “I am slightly in the if not Boris then 
Marina world, of being Brussels-based in childhood with an absolute belief in 
liberal Europe. But I’m also a journalist with a liking for drama.”

Sands adds that while the business pages are likely to reflect more of a 
pro-EU agenda, she is “talking to as many people as I can … my position is we 
do what’s best for London” - offering the intriguing prospect that a paper read 
by so many commuters to the City could still back Leave.

Claudia Rothermere is said to be such a fan of Sands and the Standard that 
there are rumours that her husband, owner of the Mail group and former owner of 
the Standard, was tempted to buy it before the last election. Asked for her 
view, Sands will only say that the Rothermeres are also “terrific as newspaper 
owners”.

At the end of the interview, she shows pictures on her phone of a recent trip 
to the building site that London Bridge station currently is. “Last year I fell 
in love with tunnels,” says the glamorous former editor of her paper’s gossip 
column, Londoner’s Diary. “That’s what happens with this job, you start off 
wanting to go to all the fashion parties and end up excited by the idea of 
going down the sewers … And there are so many more tunnels and sewers to visit.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 54

Education Kent College, Pembury; Goldsmiths College, University of London

Career 1996 deputy editor, Daily Telegraph 2005 editor, Sunday Telegraph, 2006 
consultant editor, Daily Mail2008 editor-in-chief, Readers Digest 2009 deputy 
editor, Evening Standard2012 editor
 