
The UK’s creative industries have never been stronger. British developers are 
behind some of the world’s bestselling video games, UK architectural companies 
lead on high-profile projects across the globe, while homegrown films are 
taking home the most coveted of international industry awards.


But there’s more to the creative industries than Grand Theft Auto developers 
Rockstar North <http://www.rockstarnorth.com/>, Zaha Hadid 
<https://vimeo.com/106298230> and 12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z02Ie8wKKRg>. Accounting for 1.7m jobs, 
contributing 5% of gross value added (GVA) to UK GDP and exporting £17.3bn 
annually (9% of total service exports), the creative sectoroutperforms 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2015>
 the rest of the UK economy in both growth and job creation.

It’s also hugely diverse, encompassing advertising, architecture, craft, 
design, fashion, film, television and radio, IT, software, music, the 
performing and visual arts, publishing, museums, galleries and libraries. Any 
industry, in fact, with the “potential to generate wealth and job creation 
through the generation and exploitation of intellectual property” – a 
definition from 1998, when the Labour government published theCreative 
Industries Mapping Document 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/creative-industries-mapping-documents-2001>
.

This document, the first attempt to measure the sector’s economic contribution 
to the UK, has itself been one of the major contributing factors to the success 
of the creative industries.

“They were the first government in the world to recognise it as a proper 
industrial sector,” explains William Sargent, co-founder and chief executive of 
Oscar-winning creative studioFramestore <http://www.framestore.com/>. “Now it’s 
recognised as a significant part of the British economy, so from the 
government’s point of view, they can articulate an engagement with it, where 
previously the sectors were seen as separate cottage industries.”

That said, cottage industries still operating at the top of their game and 
attracting talent from across the globe. “We have a very powerful cluster 
effect in London,” says Sargent. “Each successful manifestation and niche 
within the creative industries fed off the fact they were in a physical area 
with amazing stuff going on, which quite often cross-pollinated.”

Research and development (R&D) funding, tax credits and relationship brokering 
are just some of the ways that the government has engaged with the sector, 
creating a supportive ecosystem and facilitating growth in the years since 
mapping began, says Mehjabeen Price, chief operating officer atCreative England 
<http://www.creativeengland.co.uk/>: “The argument over the importance of the 
creative industries and investment into those industries has been won.”

But more needs to be done if that growth is to continue, says Sara John, head 
of policy at the Creative Industries Federation (CIF 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/>). “It’s still not central enough 
to the government’s industrial strategy. It’s possibly because a lot of the 
industries concerned are seen in a cultural way: some of them are sponsored by 
the department for culture, media and sport (DCMS 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-culture-media-sport>
) rather than the department for business, innovation and skills (BIS), and 
then when BIS is doing its business plan for the future, they take into account 
parts of the creative industries like tech and games because they sponsor them, 
but they don’t put creative industries up front and centre the way they need to 
be.”

This affects not just the myriad small and medium-sized enterprises that make 
up the majority of the creative sector, but carries through to education policy 
too. While Price and John welcome the government’s championing of STEM subjects 
(science, technology, engineering and maths), they’re worried about higher 
education cuts disproportionately affecting the arts and humanities and 
limiting the potential of universities to turn out what Price refers to as 
world-class creatives.

This imbalance is also in danger of “hurting” our wider economy, says John, 
drawing attention to the importance of creativity in industries like 
engineering. “It’s the Leonardo Da Vinci thing: you need to study the art of 
science and the science of art; you need both if you’re going to be successful.”

Sargent identifies a further concern, highlighting British universities’ 
shortcomings when it comes to producing employment-ready graduates with skills 
and practical experience relevant to the sector: “Universities are still a bit 
of a challenge because the courses aren’t always aligned [with the needs of the 
industry] as well as they are in Germany, France or Sweden.”


Back funding with support – and watch the arts grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/mar/26/funding-plus-support-growth-arts>
John would like to see a national strategy for England that links culture, the 
creative industries and education in a way comparable to those that exist in 
Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland. “[CIF has] members who are universities, 
arts organisations and industry. The three should be seen together because 
they’re completely connected,” she says.

“Investment in the arts helps wider economic growth because a lot of it is 
experimental – almost like R&D is in the science world – and so public arts 
funding is very important economically as well as culturally. What people do in 
schools and higher education institutions also has a knock-on affect on both 
arts and creative industries.”

Making the most of these links is more important than ever given the 
continuing climate of austerity. “We know that times are going to get tougher,” 
says Price. “Lots of arts organisations are coming alive to the need to 
diversify their portfolios, to be more commercial and more enterprising. Those 
who won’t look at exploring that option will find it difficult to survive.”

Collaborating with companies on the more commercial side of the creative 
industries has the potential to offer core culture organisations – those within 
the museum or performing arts sectors, for example – a route towards greater 
sustainability. Price adds: “Working with digital companies can open a lot of 
other avenues for art organisations. An example: advertising yourself 
differently to reach a target audience; creative industries do that all the 
time.”

Agencies like CIF and Creative England are well placed to broker those 
relationships. They can be particularly helpful, explains Price, for smaller 
core culture organisations that are open to collaborations but don’t have the 
headspace, the capacity nor the time to actually think of those innovative ways 
of working. Canny leadership and trustee appointments are another good way of 
promoting cross-industry thinking, says John, pointing to incoming Arts Council 
England chief executive Darren Henley, who comes to the funding body from 
Classic FM.

But it’s not just about economic sustainability. The fruits of collaborative 
working between the commercial and the purely cultural sectors of the industry 
range from familiar products like co-produced TV programmes to adventures in 
multiplatform storytelling that draw on expertise in technology, film, theatre 
and more. The possibilities are almost endless. It pays to think creatively.

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 