
The bullets that killed Boris Nemtsov, a leading opposition figure in Russia, 
mark a watershed. There have been political assassinations before in Vladimir 
Putin’s Russia. The list of victims is in fact strikingly long. It includes the 
journalist and human rights activist Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, gunned down in October 
2006, after she had reported far and wide on the war crimes of the Russian army 
and its local allies in Chechnya. Alexander Litvinenko, a Russian former secret 
service agent in exile in London, was poisoned to death with polonium the very 
next month. He had repeatedly accused Mr Putin of responsibility for the 1999 
Moscow and Volgodonsk bombings that set the stage for the outbreak of another 
war in Chechnya and contributed to Mr Putin’s political ascent. Mr Litvinenko 
had also helped western intelligence track down Russian mafia activities in 
Europe with Kremlin connections.

In 2009, the lawyer Sergei Magnitsky died in prison after he had been beaten 
up and refused adequate medical treatment. Mr Magnitsky had angered the Putin 
regime by revealinglarge-scale frauds  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/sergei-magnitsky-russia-trial-verdict-tax-fraud>
involving upper-ranking Russian officials. In 2009, there was also the killing 
of the prominent human rights lawyer Stanislav Markelov, along with the 
opposition journalist Anastasia Baburova, and the kidnapping and killing of the 
human rights activistNatalia Estemirova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/23/chechnya-natalia-estemirova>.

None of these cases have been seriously investigated. We only have a clear 
idea of the role of Russia’s secret services in the death of Mr Litvinenko 
because this killing happened in a western democracy with institutions able to 
get to the bottom of it. Yet Mr Nemtsov’s killing is a watershed because it is 
the first political assassination since Mr Putin decided to turn Russia into an 
irredentist expansionist power, posing grave security problems forEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Just as the Putin regime has 
shown in Ukraine that it will not tolerate a neighbouring country’s free choice 
to join Euro-Atlantic structures underpinned by democratic norms, and would 
sooner start a war than let that happen, this assassination sends the signal 
that Russia will become an ever darker, more repressive place.

By placing the Russian official investigation into Mr Nemtsov’s death under 
his direct control, Mr Putin has ensured that nothing unfavourable to him or 
his regime will ever come out of this inquiry. It is an egregious sign of the 
concentration of powers inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
that the work of the police and judiciary should be so openly placed under the 
authority of the presidency.

Minutes after Mr Nemtsov’s death, the Kremlin’s propaganda machine was already 
hard at work. Mr Putin himself immediately called the killing an act of 
“provocation” destined to harm his reputation. After Ms Politkovskaya’s death, 
he had commented that she was too unimportant to warrant an assassination, 
therefore no blame could be laid on him or his power structures. It is easy to 
understand why Mr Nemtsov had indicated in an interview, 10 days before his 
death, that he was worried Mr Putin might have him killed. A longtime activist 
for democracy since his participation in the early 1990s Boris Yeltsin 
government, Mr Nemtsov was part of Russia’s small but active liberal 
establishment which had supported the 2011-12 mass street demonstrations 
against Mr Putin’s return to the Kremlin. Mr Nemtsov was ready to replace the 
leader of this movement, the imprisoned blogger and anti-corruption activist
Alexei Navalny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, on another 
demonstration in Moscow. He also intended to come out with a detailed 
denunciation of Mr Putin’s involvement in the breakout of war in Ukraine – a 
role the Kremlin has denied all along.

The killing of Mr Nemtsov, whether it was ordered by Mr Putin directly or not, 
sheds a harsh light on the nationalist regime fuelled by propaganda that the 
Russian president has created, a system where the silencing of an independent 
democratic voice becomes almost a trophy handed to the ruler. Mr Putin has made 
it a staple of his rule to launch nationwide hate campaigns against those 
deemed “traitors” in a way reminiscent of the Stalinist era. Mr Nemtsov was 
killed right under the domes of the Kremlin, in a part of Moscow that is 
overrun with security cameras. This says something about the sense of impunity 
of the murderers. And the fear they aim to sow.
 