
The call for prayers from the mosque cuts through the early morning skies. It 
is 4 am and time for Selvan to wake up. He rolls his sparse mattress into a 
tiny bundle and deposits it in the belly of the vegetable cart, under which he 
sleeps. This tiny space is his nightly abode. The uneven granite below is cold. 
But he likes it here because it smells of jasmine, which the flower vendor 
sells along with vegetables. He knows people who have to spend nights next to 
sewers and below long haul trucks parked for the night. He had to toil hard and 
long to earn his bed space under the cart. It is his home. He has to wake up 
before the vendors bring their produce to be stacked up. He has to perform 
duties around the market as he is now part of the community .The trucks laden 
with flowers and vegetables rolls into the small market. Selvan ties a small 
piece of cloth around his head and sprints towards his 'landlord's' truck. The 
truck driver knows him well. He has been doing this every morning for the past 
three years. 'Hey Selvan, ready to break your back today?' shouts the driver 
'Yes, driver sir' says Selvan. He hits open the truck's rusting bolted door 
with a heavy rock.

Selvan always prays that it would be only flowers to be carried, no such luck 
today, it is sacks of vegetables and flowers He kneels down backwards to pick 
up a sack of potatoes and carries it on his back. He thinks his back would 
really break today. His duties are done after unloading twelve bags. He salutes 
the driver, who shoos him away. It is 6 am and time to go to work for eleven 
year old Selvan.

Like Selvan there are scores of children in the city of Bangalore in southern 
India who are either orphans or have run away from abusive parents. The sheer 
will to survive, drives them to do any sort of work and because of their 
vulnerability they invariably get exploited. Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first 
Prime Minister, recognised illiteracy as the root cause for poverty and vowed 
to provide education for every single child born. Sixty years since then India 
is still grappling with this, undecided about making compulsory education a law 
as it calls for a colossal overhaul of the system and its implementation is of 
a gargantuan nature.

Selvan speaks about his past quite candidly. His mother died unexpectedly when 
he was eight years old. After that his father, already an irresponsible drunk, 
started drinking even more and stayed away from home for days. Even though it 
was a one roomed hut in a slum, one among the many hundreds in the city, Selvan 
was pestered to pay rent to the local mafia. Selvan's fifteen year old brother 
had run away from home three years ago. He whisked Selvan away one day and 
introduced him to the flower and vegetable market and a new trade, rag picking, 
rummaging through garbage dumps. He speaks the local language Kannada. 'Life is 
very hard on the streets. No one has any pity for you, but I like what I do 
now, I have independence. I would like to go to school and work in an office, 
but I can't afford to' Local NGOs have tried to get him into school, along with 
his brother and other rag pickers. The school is run entirely with funds 
donated by charitable individuals. The local MP, who is also an educationist, 
provides books and uniforms from his own funds. Lunch, everyday is provided by 
ISKON (International Society for Krishna Consciousness)

Selvan and his brother lasted three days in school. Their precious time to 
earn money in the mornings was being taken away. They went back to scavenging 
rubbish dumps.

'I don't blame them' says the dedicated headmaster of the school. 'This 
happens all the time, this form of education does not suit them, and they 
cannot be in school all day'.

According to BOSCO, an organisation which deals exclusively with 
rehabilitating street children, there are 80,000 street children in the city of 
Bangalore alone. BOSCO has five shelters spread across the city's most densely 
populated areas. The organisation identifies street children and offers them 
guidance and informal education. Children who have run away from home are 
guided back home. If the situation at home is adverse, then provisions are made 
for them to live in the shelters, where informal and vocational training is 
given. Older children are helped with finding jobs and homes.

Such organisations with their limited resources try to reach out to the large 
street children population, but children like Selvan are missed out. NGOs work 
hard to influence policy makers, raise funds and most important of all instil 
trust amongst street children. 'I just don't trust them' says Selvan 'They have 
all these kids living in this large house, they give them food and clothes for 
free, why anyone would do that?' questions Selvan with an adult like demeanour. 
'I know what happens in there, they convert everyone to Christians', he says 
lowering his voice.

BOSCO is an NGO started in 1980 by the Salesian students of Kristu Jyoti 
College Bangalore, to work with street children. It is part of the Don Bosco 
Institution. They draw inspiration from the 16th century Turin priest and 
educationist, Don Bosco, who is known for his selfless work with street 
children in Turin, Italy. Though they may seem like a religious mission, their 
primary aim is the rehabilitation of children at risk. The aim of such NGOs is 
to provide street children vocational training as opposed to formal education. 
The later form of education often tends to be quite basic in free schools, 
which makes competing in the open job market an arduous task. Vocational 
education gives street children the opportunity to gain meaningful and 
respectable jobs.

Selvan has not ruled out going to school, but today he says is a lucky day at 
the garbage dump. 'I found a lot of metal, they always give us good money for 
this. But I have to be careful, a lot of syringes lying around today. The 
hospital truck must have arrived last night' he says gingerly, treading piles 
of garbage.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 