
David Almond
I'd give a child any book by the amazing Cressida Cowell. Best to start with 
How to Train Your Dragon (Hodder) and then go on to the whole series that 
recounts the life and adventures of Hiccup Horrendous Haddock III. The books 
are exciting, barmy, hilarious, clever, original, accessible, heartwarming and 
wonderfully well written.

Margaret Atwood
The book I most often give as a gift is The Gift, by Lewis Hyde (Canongate). I 
keep four or five copies around the house at all times, for swift giving to 
people who need them. Most often they are artists of one kind or another, and 
are worrying about the disconnect between what they do and how hard they work, 
and how little money they make. Hyde's book explains the differences between 
the money economy in which we think we live, and the gift economy, in which we 
also live. Gifts – including artistic gifts – travel in mysterious ways, but 
travel they must, or else they die.The Gift is essential reading for anyone who 
has embarked on this journey. (It also inspired the creators ofWorld Book Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/world-book-night>. That is one of its gifts.)

John Banville
The most fascinating and most beautifully produced book I have come across in 
some years was given to me by a friend this Christmas past.Microscripts, by 
Robert Walser, translated from the German by Susan Bernofsky (New 
Directions/Christine Burgin), is a thing like no other, a transcription of 
Walser's tiny stories that he wrote in maniacally tiny handwriting, the letters 
no more than a millimetre high, so that an entire story would fit on the back 
of a matchbox. The deciphering of the script, by Werner Morlang and Bernhard 
Echte, was a triumph of scholarly tenacity, and this edition, designed by 
Christine Burgin, is a triumph of the book-maker's art.

William Boyd
On the whole I prefer to give a book token and let people make their own 
selection, but my book-gift of choice more often than not tends to beVladimir 
Nabokov's Pale Fire (Penguin Modern Classics). It is a unique novel – taking 
the form of hundreds of pages of footnotes to a 999-line epic poem in rhyming 
couplets. It's very funny, as well as being very brilliant. No one else could 
have written it and no one could ever hope to write anything similar. So I give 
it, I suppose, both as a kind of a test and a mark of respect, the subtext 
being: I hope you appreciate this extraordinary book and also that I think you 
are the type of cultured person with a fully functioning sense of humour who 
will.

Raymond Briggs
The best book I received as a child was William the Outlaw, by Richmal Crompton
 (Macmillan). I remember sitting by the fire in the kitchen and laughing so 
much I almost fell off the chair. My mother got slightly alarmed thinking I was 
having a fit. Today, I have an almost complete collection of the William books; 
their crackpot humour never dates and is as good as the Goons.

Anthony Browne
The one book I would give to a child is The Mysteries of Harris Burdick by the 
American writer and illustratorChris Van Allsburg (Andersen), an extraordinary, 
unique picture book with a brilliant premise. The fictional introduction – the 
only piece of text longer than two sentences – explains that the pictures in 
the book are the articles of an unsolved mystery. Thirty years ago a man called 
Harris Burdick approached a children's book publisher, explaining that he had 
written 14 stories. Rather than burden the publisher with his entire body of 
work, he brought just one picture from each story, under each of which he had 
written the title and a brief caption for the illustration. The publisher was 
fascinated by the pictures and told Burdick that he would like to see the 
stories in their entirety as soon as possible. Burdick agreed to bring them to 
him the next day. But he didn't show up. For years, the publisher tried 
desperately to track him down, without success. Harris Burdick had mysteriously 
disappeared and all that was left of him were the 14 mesmerising pictures.

The rest of the book shows us the strange black and white illustrations with 
their titles and captions. Each one is a superb, imaginative work of art. 
Having set himself up with the inspired introduction, Van Allsburg was then at 
liberty to produce a series of drawings entirely from his imagination, free 
from the limitations of a traditional narrative. The result is a series of 
implied narratives that are as enthralling as the child's imagination chooses 
them to be. I have often talked about the importance of leaving gaps between 
the pictures and the text for children to fill in with their own imaginations. 
In the case ofThe Mysteries of Harris Burdick, the gaps are cavernous.

AS Byatt
I particularly like giving books to my literary granddaughter, who is going to 
read English at university next year. Things like theComplete Poems of Emily 
Dickinson, or the poems of Wallace Stevens, or Keats's letters. Or Alice 
Oswald's The Thing in the Gap-Stone Stile (Faber). I remember starting my own 
library of poetry at her age, and I still have those books. I also send her 
things likeAngela Carter's anthology Wayward Girls and Wicked Women (Virago) – 
short, sharp stories to read in between A level studies.

Julia Donaldson
I would give Days with Frog and Toad, by Arnold Lobel (Harper). This is one of 
four books, each containing five short stories about a pair of amphibian 
friends. Frog is the straight guy and Toad is the comically cantankerous half 
of the duo. He endears himself to readers because he embodies so many human 
foibles, such as laziness, fear and attachment to routine. (And his frequent 
exclamations of "Blah!" get children hooting with laughter, so perhaps it's not 
the ideal bedtime choice.) In my favourite story, "The List", Toad makes a list 
of Things To Do and then refuses to do anything when it blows away. (He can't 
chase after it because that wasn't on the list.) I know just how he feels.

Roddy Doyle
I think I was 10. I was having a party. The weather was good, so my mother was 
keeping us all outside, so we'd break nothing and get sick on the grass. One of 
my friends handed me a present. He looked a bit embarrassed. I knew what it was 
before I opened it. A book.

Books weren't presents. I loved books, but they were a bit like food. I loved 
chicken, but a leg in wrapping paper would have been a huge disappointment. But 
my mother was looking, so I thanked him and tore off the paper.Great 
Expectations. I eventually read it. Pip in the graveyard, the escaped convict – 
more than 40 years later, I'm still reading Dickens.

Margaret Drabble
The best book I've ever been given is the complete six-volume edition of Van 
Gogh's letters last Christmas, but the book I kept on giving to my 
grandchildren when they were small wasDr Seuss's The Sneetches (HarperCollins). 
I gave them all lots of copies until I was told to stop. I loved this book so 
much, I wanted them to love it too. Dr Seuss is so amusing and egalitarian and 
free-thinking and so unlike all the more respectable English books I was given 
and liked as a child.Green Eggs and Ham was pretty good too, but the Sneetches 
were best. They should be compulsory reading for all warring nations.

Dave Eggers
I find myself recommending Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's Half of a Yellow Sun 
(Harper Perennial), about the Biafran war, all the time. It's ideal for people 
who are are looking for the scope and breadth of Tolstoy, or Chekhov, Edward P 
Jones or even Steinbeck. She has the kind of unwavering command of history and 
humanity that puts her in that company.

Tim Flannery
My all-time favourite book gift is Oliver Lawson Dick's edition of John 
Aubrey's Brief Lives (Penguin). You can almost smell and taste 17th-century 
England, and with the lives of the likes of Shakespeare, Hobbes, Harvey and 
Lady Herbert revealed "unto ye cunny", it was far too dangerous a work to 
publish until long after Aubrey's death.

The book I've been most pleased to receive is Tomás O'Crohan's 1929 classic 
The Islandman (Oxford). It was a present from my great friend Adam Wynn, and 
what a classic tale it is, telling vividly of the last remnants of a truly 
tribal Europe.

Neil Gaiman
The book I give most often is Tom Phillips's gloriously strange A Humument 
(Thames & Hudson). I do not know how to describe it to people – art book? 
Novel? Proto-graphic novel? It is unique: a mundane and gloomily worthy 
Victorian novel calledA Human Document, recreated, reinvented and retold, page 
by page, into the adventures of a man named Toge. Each page has been painted 
into, cut up. The original novel is still visible, but now there's a mad, 
allusive tale of life on top of it, filled with gnomic, haiku-like texts and 
paintings. It even has a sex scene. Whatever it is, it makes me happy.

John Gray
"Everything stated or expressed by man is a note in the margin of a completely 
erased text." So writesFernando Pessoa in the 148th note of The Book of Disquiet
 (Penguin, edited and translated by Richard Zenith), a unique text composed 
from scraps that the elusive Portuguese writer left in a large trunk; it was 
first published in 1982, nearly 50 years after his death. Writing under the 
guise of a series of alter egos or "heteronyms", Pessoa established himself as 
one – in fact, several – of Portugal and Europe's greatest poets. If you're 
looking for plot and character or a message of some kind,The Book of Disquiet 
is not for you. If you're bored with such conventional fictions, it may be the 
book you've always been looking for.

Mark Haddon
The book I most often give away is Guns, Germs and Steel by Jared Diamond 
(Vintage). As the subtitle describes it, it is "A short history of everybody 
for the last 13,000 years". At root it is an explanation of why Eurasians run 
the world: not because of any innate racial superiority but because of blunt 
geographical and biological facts. It's easy for societies to move east or west 
between similar climates, for example, but very hard for societies to migrate 
north and south (you don't cross the Sahara on a whim in search of good 
farmland). The book is also packed with solutions to old unanswered questions 
as well as intriguing questions you'd never thought of asking. Why did Aztecs 
die of Spanish diseases while the Spanish seemed immune to Aztec ones? Why 
can't you train a leopard to hunt? How the hell did anyone find Pitcairn 
Island, let alone tell anyone else about it?

The book I've most enjoyed receiving as a gift is Full Moon, by Michael Light 
(Cape), which is full of big, beautiful, digitally restored photographs of the 
Apollo missions. I think it's very difficult to believe completely in the fact 
that men have travelled to the moon until you read this book – the crispness of 
the focus, the sheer physical detail, bolts and tubes and scratched glass, the 
dirtiness of the lunar surface. Perhaps I'm still a 12-year-old boy at heart, 
but I can't open this book without a kind of ache, an almost religious 
realisation that there really is somewhere else.

Mohsin Hamid
The book I most often give is Pereira Maintains by the Italian writer Antonio 
Tabucchi, translated by Patrick Creagh (Canongate). It's an amazing novel: a 
political thriller, a touching romance, deliciously compressed and formally 
intriguing. I give it because it's a pleasure to read and among the books I 
love it's the one that most people have never heard of. (It's also one of the 
books I've been most pleased to receive as a gift, in San Francisco a decade 
ago, for all the same reasons.)

Charlie Higson
I would give a child any of Andy Stanton's Mr Gum books (Egmont) – they are 
wildly funny and inventive and play around with the whole idea of what a book 
is and how a story is told. Any author who creates a billionaire gingerbread 
man called Alan Taylor deserves to win the Nobel prize for literature. The book 
I was most pleased to receive when I was a kid was a collection of Greek myths 
and legends. I've always loved these stories and they're the basis of nearly 
every story told since then. They appealed to me as boy because there's a 
pleasing lack of morality to them and lots of fighting.

Eric Hobsbawm
I was once, a long long time ago, given WH Auden's Look, Stranger! (Faber), 
just published, as a birthday present. That is the book gift I remember most 
vividly.

Mary Hoffman

If the child were 8-12 years old, I think I would choose Louis Sachar's Holes 
(Bloomsbury). This is a perfectly constructed book as well as being exciting, 
funny and full of suspense. You know you are in safe hands from the opening 
line: "There is no lake at Camp Green Lake." It's a real writer's book, giving 
tremendous pleasure to an adult who appreciates Sachar's skill. But it's 
equally enjoyable by a child reader – a winner all round.

Michael Holroyd
The book I most often give as a present is A High Wind in Jamaica, by Richard 
Hughes (Vintage Classics). A superficial reason is that, owing to a generous 
moment of confusion by Royal Mail, I have several copies in a handsome Folio 
Society edition. But the real reason is that I consider it a much-overlooked 
and undervalued novel, inappropriately eclipsed perhaps by William Golding's
Lord of the Flies. On one level it's an exciting adventure story with great 
storms and earthquakes, terrific animals, unruly children and some dubious 
pirates. What more, when young, could you want? But all this coexists with 
another narrative, darker and more sophisticated, complex and tragic. You can 
read this book over again and have read a different novel.

Anthony Horowitz
If there was anything I hated receiving as a child, it was a book token. I had 
a couple of namby-pamby aunts who always gave me book tokens, a present almost 
purposely designed to remind me how thick and illiterate I was. There was 
always the expectation that I would buy a "good" book – rather than a Beano 
annual. And anyway I often lost the wretched thing long before I got anywhere 
near a shop. But I loved receiving books and still remember unwrappingAndrew 
Lang's Tales of Troy (Wordsworth) one Christmas day. It instantly opened the 
world of myth and legend for me. I absolutely loved the adventures of Ulysses, 
the death of Achilles, the rivalry of the gods, the construction of the wooden 
horse that ended the nine long years of war. Myths could be seen as the first 
great stories of our civilisation, and Lang told them very well (with excellent 
illustrations). This was the start of an enthusiasm that has lasted to this 
day. I still hate book tokens though.

Lewis Hyde
I went to college in Minnesota in the mid-1960s. There were a number of 
talented poets in the state at the time, including Robert Bly and John 
Berryman. We young writers used to hang around them just to see how they held 
their pens, what kind of paper they used, what they ate for breakfast.

This is an example, it turns out, of a Hindu practice, darshan, meaning to lay 
eyes on or to behold. Young artists need to be able to contemplate their more 
accomplished elders. Something is transmitted by sight alone. More is 
transmitted, of course, by the work of art itself, by the poem spoken or in 
print. And, to be sure, there needs to be an actual cash economy of literature 
if writers and publishers are to survive. But the cash economy is useless 
unless the gift of art is there as well, doing its strange, transformative work.

The young Bob Dylan lived in Minnesota a few years before I got there and he 
has since written about the day in Minneapolis when he first heard Woody 
Guthrie recordings: "I listened all afternoon . . . as if in a trance . . . 
feeling more like myself than ever before".

Myself, I remember that Bly once gave me a little pamphlet of translations 
he'd made of poems by Issa. Here's one of them:

Now listen, you watermelons –

if any thieves come –

turn into frogs!

The first page of this pamphlet contained a simple declaration: "This booklet 
is a gift, and is not to be sold." Years later I myself was to write a book on 
gift exchange and art. Perhaps the seed of that work was planted by my having 
been lucky enough to witness an older man's generosity.

PD James
I never give books, only book tokens, which I give frequently for birthdays 
and at Christmas to young and old members of my family. There would in any case 
be no book that I would most often give, as each book has to be chosen 
individually for the recipient. The book I have been most pleased to receive was
The Oxford Book of English Verse 1250-1900, edited by Arthur Quiller-Couch, 
which was awarded to me as a short story prize at the Cambridge and County High 
School for Girls on 12 November 1936.

Hari Kunzru
As so much of my reading life takes place onscreen, I've increasingly begun to 
fetishise books as objects. I find a lot of gifts in rare-book dealers – a 
first of BS Johnson'sThe Unfortunates as a wedding present for two writers, and 
an early edition ofThe Lord of the Rings for a childhood friend. I've given 
several people books inCollins's Britain in Pictures series, published as a 
patriotic exercise during the second world war. These little books survey 
everything from novelists to mountaineers. Texts were written by major figures 
such as Edith Sitwell, John Betjeman, John Piper and Cecil Beaton. They're 
beautiful and inexpensive, and you can always find one that's appropriate for 
the recipient.

John Lanchester
About 10 years ago I had a conversation with Jonathan Franzen about writers' 
books, in the sense of books particularly admired by other writers but not, for 
whatever reason, as widely famous as they deserved to be. He mentionedJesus' 
Son, by Denis Johnson, and since then it's become the book I've given away more 
often than any other. It's a collection of linked short stories, Johnson's 
first; before it he was best known as a poet. It's a beautifully fresh fiction, 
whose main character is a young, junky alcoholic, and it's an extraordinary, 
Blakean piece of poetic prose – that being one of the hardest things for any 
writer to achieve without succumbing to self-indulgence.

Another book I greatly admire and have often given away, and even more often 
recommended, isJohn Keegan's The Face of Battle (Pimlico), about ordinary 
soldiers' experience of war down the centuries. For some reason I've had a very 
low level of uptake when it comes to people actually reading the book, maybe 
because the friends I've given it to tend to be anti-war types. But that's the 
point: the soldier's-eye-view makes this about as anti-war as a book can be.

Andrea Levy
In 1979 I was given a copy of The Women's Room, by Marilyn French (Virago) for 
my 23rd birthday. I had never really read a novel from start to finish before. 
I was made to read Dickens and George Eliot at school, which was such tough 
going for me that I believed reading fiction to be a form of torture. So I 
looked at this fat book and wondered if it might be useful as a door stop. But 
then I started to I read it and I was amazed. That experience changed me into a 
voracious reader. It was the most valuable present I have ever been given.

David Lodge
I possess a small black-bound copy of Three Men in a Boat (To say nothing of 
the Dog!), by Jerome K Jerome, inscribed on the fly-leaf: "Happy Xmas to David, 
Love & Kisses, Auntie Eileen" and dated "Xmas 1944". I was nine years and 
eleven months old. Eileen was my mother's younger sister, a glamorous and 
exciting figure to me because she was working as a civilian secretary for the 
US army in recently liberated Paris. How she obtained the book, the 106th 
impression, printed in December 1944, and conveyed it to me I do not know. It 
quickly became one of my favourite books, which I read again and again, 
especially when comfort reading was required. I tended to skip the historical 
and topographical passages and revisit the comic set pieces. I have just read 
the first few pages again and almost immediately I was laughing aloud at the 
funniest description of hypochondria in all literature.

Many years later a Bulgarian postgraduate student who was writing a thesis 
about my novels wrote to ask me some questions, one of which was: "is your 
writing influenced by Jerome K Jerome?" It had never occurred to me before – I 
liked to answer this kind of question with such names as Joyce, Greene and 
Waugh, but I replied without hesitation, "Yes". I hope she got her PhD – she 
deserved it for that insight.

David Mitchell
Choosing the right gift-book is the art of the matchmaker – it must be 
tailored to the individual – and so there's no single book that I give to 
people habitually. Books that I have given to more than one person, however, 
includeNeil Gaiman's The Graveyard Book (Bloomsbury), Minnesotan poet James 
Wright's The Branch Will Not Break (Wesleyan University Press), Chekhov's A 
Life in Letters (Penguin) (his de facto memoir) and, most recently, Keith 
Richards's meaty, wise autobiography, Life (Weidenfeld & Nicolson).

The book I was most pleased to receive as a gift was Through the Looking-Glass
. I was about 10, and my mum just left it in my bedroom, unannounced. I 
remember following the bizarrely staid Alice on her trippy quest (wondering why 
she never screams "You people are all total nutters!") until it was too dark to 
read any more.

Michael Moorcock
Apart from George Meredith's spectacular The Amazing Marriage (out of print 
for 80 years), the book I give away most frequently is probablyOne Last Mad 
Embrace, by Jack Trevor Story (Reinkarnation), once the Guardian's favourite 
and funniest columnist. AlthoughThe Trouble with Harry and Live Now, Pay Later 
are better known (and almost as funny), I believeEmbrace to be his masterpiece, 
skilfully blending the real life of an impoverished movie writer with a 
hilariously fast-paced plot. It's impossible to tell where autobiography ends 
and invention begins, but it's safe to say that the more absurd and incredible 
the anecdote the more likely it is to derive from Story's own life. For some 
reason, books about lower middle-class or working-class life rarely stay in 
print, but Story's books have enough enthusiasts to be regularly reprinted and 
are pictures of an almost forgotten world of the 1950s and 60s.

The book I was most pleased to receive (as an adult) was The Exploits of 
Engelbrecht by Maurice Richardson, recently reprinted by Savoy Books with all 
the original brilliant illustrations from Lilliput magazine. The Surrealist 
Sporting Club's dwarf boxer mostly fights timepieces, but plays Mars at soccer, 
enjoys the night of the big witch shoot, looks in at a very long-running play 
at the Plant Theatre and goes 10 rounds with a grandfather clock. Absolutely 
original, incredibly funny. The new edition is also one of the most beautifully 
produced books around.

Andrew Motion
I don't have a regular giveaway book: I'm more likely to give something I 
happen to have read recently and liked. But if I were to have a regular . . . 
it would beEdward Thomas's Collected Poems (Faber). They don't make big claims, 
but they're stealthily commanding: a beautiful end in themselves, and a doorway 
to modern poetry. And being given something? The chance would be a fine thing. 
Anything by or about Tennyson is always very welcome (address supplied).

David Nicholls

The books we give change as we grow older. At university I presented The 
Rattle Bag to anyone who so much as looked at me, but two have remained 
constant over the years:Tender is the Night, by F Scott Fitzgerald (Penguin) and
JD Salinger's Franny and Zooey (Penguin), two books that languish in the shadow 
of better-known works. In truth,Franny and Zooey is more of a gamble – I know 
some people find it precious and self-indulgent – but I'd be very wary of 
befriending anyone who wasn't moved by the last page of that beautiful book.

As to gifts I've received, I have a first edition of Philip Larkin's The 
Whitsun Weddings which would be at the top of my list in the event of that 
terrible hypothetical house-fire.

Michelle Paver
When I was about five years old, my father gave me Once Long Ago, by Roger 
Lancelyn Green for Christmas. At the time, I didn't own many hardbacks – mostly 
we got our books from the library – and this was the biggest, most beautiful 
book I'd ever owned. It's a marvellous collection of fairy stories from around 
the world: there's a man-eating Chinese monster who's a satisfyingly messy 
eater, an ancient Egyptian treasure thief, a terrifying Icelandic witch in a 
stone boat – and many more, all evocatively illustrated by the Czech artist 
Vojtech Kubasta. Although I didn't realise it at the time, each story is retold 
in a style that's in keeping with its source country, whether it's Sudanese, 
Polynesian, Japanese or Basuto.

I read it again and again. I don't think it's a coincidence that I've ended up 
delving into the myths of different cultures to create my own fairy tales. And 
it hasn't escaped my notice that the first story in the collection is an 
American Indian story called "The Boy and the Wolves".

Terry Pratchett
Some miscalculation a few years ago meant that we ended up with, I think, five 
copies ofEats, Shoots & Leaves. We didn't take any of them back to the shop, 
taking the view that even in the outside toilet you might find yourself wanting 
to know in a hurry about the correct usage of the Oxford comma. The experience 
led to a family pact, but generallySchott's Miscellany manages to get through 
twice. That is fine because in our house books are neither furnishings nor 
badges of learning; they are debris. Officially we have two libraries, which 
are defined as places where you store your old books while your new books pile 
up beside the bed. All library owners have to beware of the inveterate book 
borrower but I am a compulsive book lender and keep a stock ofGail Bell's The 
Poison Principle(Pan), and I'm down to my last copy of Dorothy Hartley's Food 
in England (Piatkus).

Annie Proulx
As I love Italian cuisine I have given away so many copies of that wonderful 
regional history of geography, people, particular dishes and foodstuffs by the 
Russian-born literary scholarElena Kostioukovitch, Why Italians Love to Talk 
About Food (Duckworth), that I rarely have a copy on hand for myself. 
Kostioukovitch is Umberto Eco's translator. The book is lavishly illustrated 
and gives great reading pleasure. For North American friends who share an 
interest in natural history, I have found nothing more gripping and readable 
thanTim Flannery's The Eternal Frontier: An Ecological History of North America 
and Its Peoples (Penguin). For friends who are curious about New Mexico, the 
unique murder mysteries ofTony Hillerman featuring Navajo policemen Joe 
Leaphorn and Jim Chee give a detailed picture of the dry desert-mountain 
terrain of the American south-west.

Jonathan Raban
There's an element of missionary activity in giving a book to a friend. Of 
course you want to simply share your own excitement and pleasure in the text, 
but you also want to turn your friend into a fellow convert, an initiate in the 
faith. I like to give poetry anthologies to people who don't usually read 
poetry. It hardly matters which anthology: it might bePalgrave's Golden Treasury
 (Oxford), orChristopher Ricks's newish edition of The Oxford Book of English 
Verse, or Ted Hughes and Seamus Heaney's The Rattle Bag (Faber). I imagine 
someone, grown slack in the habit of skimming a novel for its story or a 
newspaper column for its opinion, discovering, for the first time, the joy of 
patiently teasing out, say, the three stanzas of Keats's "Ode to Melancholy", 
word by word and line by line, over the course of a rapt hour or three.

Ian Rankin
When I was a student, a friend gave me the first two volumes of Anthony 
Powell's A Dance to the Music of Time (Arrow) for my birthday. I started 
reading the first book, thinking: not sure I'm going to like this. All snobby 
privilege and a world I won't be interested in. By volume two, I was hooked. 
Widmerpool and the others were such good company, and the writing was elegant 
and concise, so I bought the rest of the books in the series.

Michael Rosen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-rosen>

It all depends on the age of the child, but I think the tales that seem to 
work on so many levels for different ages are theGreek myths. I know of two 
very good retellings – Geraldine McCaughrean's and Terry Deary's – but the 
stories can be revisited in different ways at different times in our lives. 
This makes them great for sharing, too.

Meg Rosoff
My parents gave me Madeleine L'Engle's A Wrinkle in Time (Puffin) for my 11th 
birthday. The book features a geeky, intelligent child who also happens to be 
named Meg; she is overshadowed by a variety of cooler, more intelligent, 
academically successful characters. As part of the harrowing quest to find her 
scientist father, Meg is presented with the gift of her faults by the strange 
and tragic Mrs Whatsit. This was my first literary epiphany – it went against 
everything I'd ever been taught about being good and cultivating only positive 
qualities. Passion, stubbornness and rage save Meg in the end, and it was 
exactly those qualities that (after many trials and tribulations, and more than 
30 years later) saved me.

Salman Rushdie
Three times in my life I've been given beautiful old editions of translations 
of the great story-compendiumThe Arabian Nights, or, to give it its proper 
title,The Thousand Nights and One Night. I'm delighted to have them all. This 
is the book that contains all other books; and its frame story, the tale of the 
teller of tales Scheherazade, is one of the great accounts of heroism in all of 
literature. It is the story of how a brilliant and brave woman escapes death at 
the hands of a monster – King Shahryar, who has been marrying, deflowering and 
then executing a virgin every night for three years – by telling him stories 
every night for the next two and three-quarter years and, improbably, 
civilising him. That she falls in love with the beast she tames is also the 
stuff of fable.

Lionel Shriver
The novel I've most enjoyed giving is A Home at the End of the World, by 
Michael Cunningham (Penguin). This author is better known for a later book, The 
Hours – naturally, since that one made it to the cinema. But this earlier novel 
has a rare warmth to it, without ever seeming sappy. It reconfigures the 
concept of family into something you can create, as opposed to a bunch of 
people you're simply stuck with. When I gave this book to my best friend in New 
York, he went out and bought – I kid you not – 10 more copies to give to other 
friends. Now that's a good present: one that multiplies itself.

Frances Stonor Saunders
The Door, by Magda Szabó, translated by Len Rix (Vintage) is a painfully 
beautiful account of the unlikely bond between two women – an (unnamed) married 
writer and her enigmatic cleaner, Emerence – who are separated by class, 
education, age and experience. The story develops into an emotionally and 
morally complex pas de deux, and holds you spellbound until the end.

You can read the novel again and again without really understanding how it 
works, but it conjures a psychological atmosphere that is unforgettable. It 
confirms the Hungarian Szabó as one of the great voices of 20th-century 
European literature. She died in 2007, aged 90, with a book in her lap.

Colm Tóibín
Over the 19 years since it first appeared, Eugene McCabe's novel Death and 
Nightingales (Vintage) is the book I have most often given to people. This is 
because of my own experience reading it – a sheer delight in the scenes and 
sentences, and then a realisation, a sudden jolt, as the enormity of what is 
really being planned and plotted becomes plain to both the heroine and the 
reader all at the same time. It is a wonderful gift because once someone has 
read this book, they become addicted to talking about it, describing their 
shock at the level of darkness and evil and sheer malevolence, as well as 
innocence, depicted and dramatised in its pages.

Rose Tremain
All writers have to steer a difficult course round the giving of their own 
books. When I started writing, I used to imagine that friends would gasp with 
joy at the arrival of a newly publishedRose Tremain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rose-tremain> hardback, but I was mainly 
deluded. And I never had much luck with either of my parents or with my sister 
as readers. The gift of a new book was habitually followed by a deafening 
silence.

Perhaps this has made me wary of offering novels – my own, or anyone else's. 
What I most often give is the poetry that has really spoken to me, starting 
with my three favourite collected editions,Yeats, Auden and Larkin, and topping 
these up with a dash ofCarol Ann Duffy, who seems to be the only serious modern 
poet who has remembered how to conjure the liberating power of laughter.

Sarah Waters
One of my most treasured possessions is a Picador paperback copy of the 
Grimms' Household Tales, given to me as an 11th birthday present in 1977. Until 
then, fairy stories had come to me via Disney, and were rather cosy affairs. 
These short, odd stories were much darker, and I found myself both troubled and 
thrilled by their macabre details: the talking horse's head in "The 
Goose-Girl", the endlessly growing noses in "The Nose Tree", the little girl 
who has to cut off a finger to make a key for her brothers' prison in "The 
Seven Ravens". The illustrations – by Mervyn Peake – only added to the beauty 
and the weirdness.

Like all powerful narratives, their meanings shift with each re-reading. I was 
wonderfully lucky to receive them at such a hungry, impressionable age. The 
book, when I handle it now, still feels like a gift.

Jacqueline Wilson
To a small child I'd give Lavender's Blue: A Book of Nursery Rhymes, compiled 
byKathleen Lines and brilliantly illustrated by Harold Jones (Oxford). He uses 
a wonderful delicate colour palette of blue, sage green, lilac and apricot to 
create his own quirkily detailed dream-like world. You could pore over the 
pages every day for a year and still find fresh delights.

www.worldbooknight.org
 