
Feathery fuzz blows from fresh-leaved trees behind me in Soho Square. I walk 
along Frith Street past William Hazlitt's house and the tattoo parlour. The 
street is sticky from the night before. The puddles are opaque and milky. 
Ronnie Scott's is having a facelift at 47. The cast of Mary Poppins flow 
through the stage door of the Prince Edward Theatre. Cafe tables rest rickety 
on the grubby pavement outside Little Italy, Bar Italia and Nino's. A woman in 
Chanel sunglasses and a fleece cups her hand around her cappuccino for warmth. 
A traffic warden is giving a fire engine a parking ticket.

I turn on to Old Compton Street, dodging the men in aprons and scowls pushing 
overloaded hand trolleys. To the left on Greek Street, grey net curtains blow 
limply in the spring breeze behind the unlit lightboxes. To the right is Café 
Bertaux.

I'm greeted by a woman with a polka-dot scarf, a brunette bouffant swirl like 
a Danish pastry and a welcoming voice like café au lait. She tells me she will 
bring my coffee and tart upstairs to me.

Generations of feet have worn the lino from the steps. The air is saturated 
with the louche charisma of Quentin Crisp's Soho. The Formica table tops each 
have a couple of tulips in a half-pint tumbler. A Greaser couple sip tea. She 
has a box jacket striped like a Mint Imperial and Betty Page Bangs. He has a 
quiff, Malcolm X specs and clumsy gold on every finger. A group of stripy 
shirts chatter over a mound of spent crockery. They are compiling a Rich List. 
"I'm looking for colour and humour." "I'm looking after my expense account."

A Virginia Woolf in a floral frock sits by a man with a Panama hat. On my 
right, a young designer leafs through her portfolio and sticks a spoon in the 
pastry decadence of her strawberry tart. Mine is a quivering tower of luscious 
fruit and Sauce Anglaise. The rich flavours aren't obscured by sweetness. 
Raspberries squirt acid clarity across the custard. This is not something to 
guzzle, but sensation to be savoured in nibbles, so no flavour escapes the 
opportunity to be tasted.

Bertaux is the antithesis of chain coffee shops. The shabby quirkiness and 
character cannot be franchised and replicated on every high street. It's also 
expensive. It's a place to take someone you like. Someone who appreciates a 
treat.

· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 