
The corpses start to arrive this morning. Professor Gunther von Hagens will be 
at the gallery in east London to receive and meticulously arrange them for 
exhibition, just as he has done already in Japan, Germany, Switzerland and 
Belgium. All his old favourites will be there. There will be a skinned male 
body crouched over a chessboard with his cranium split open to show his brain, 
seemingly contemplating a move that he will never make.

There will be The Horseman, a rider with his skull chopped in two and his body 
flayed to show the underlying musculature. He sits with his brain in one hand 
and a whip in the other, astride the posed and flayed cadaver of a horse, 
frozen for ever in its leap. There will be another figure chopped up and 
vertically expanded so that his body resembles a sashimied totem pole or a 
Salvador Dali painting in which the sliced body looks like a chest of drawers. 
There will be the erect, flayed cadaver of a man holding his own skin aloft as 
though it was a precious trophy. Which, in a sense, it is.

But most distressingly of all, at the denouement to the exhibition, there will 
be the bisected cadaver of an eight-months pregnant woman with her womb opened 
to reveal the foetus. Von Hagens always arranges the exhibition this way: it 
starts relatively mutedly with preserved body parts and ends with the emotional 
climacteric of this double tragedy, held for ever in suspended animation - 
thanks to the professor's revolutionary preservation technique called 
plastination.

Some 25 corpses, along with 175 body parts, are to be displayed at the 
Atlantis Gallery in Brick Lane, in an anatomical exhibition of real human 
bodies. It is called Body Worlds or Körperwelten. Professor von Hagens argues 
that it will provide unique insights into the human body for a culture deprived 
of the public spectacle of anatomical theatres. It will democratise anatomy, he 
claims, make us understand our bodies better, and - if we study the 
cholesterol-crammed aortas, diseased lungs and booze-swollen livers in the 
exhibition - may well have significant benefits in terms of public health.

Before the exhibition has started, it has already caused one of those 
ill-informed media ding-dongs. Yesterday, the Tory MP Teddy Taylor was produced 
by Radio 4's Today programme to rant against Von Hagens. Lamentably, Taylor 
hadn't seen the exhibition. Even more upsetting for Taylor's argument, no 
British public money has been lavished on this shameful show; it has been 
funded by Von Hagens. But still Taylor insisted: "This will only appeal to 
ghoulish groups in our society. What possible benefit can a normal person gain 
from looking at dead bodies?"

Von Hagens giggles. "It is an honour to cause this controversy," he says as he 
strides through the Brick Lane puddles, a dead ringer for the artist Joseph 
Beuys in his black fedora, many-pocketed sleeveless jacket and deep-socketed 
stare. Like Beuys, he is part shaman and part showman; at once an anatomical 
scientist bent on shaking up a western society that he regards as living in 
denial of its corporeality and of death, and a PT Barnum basking in the media 
hoopla of his British reception, aware that part of the appeal of Body Worlds 
is the same as that which drew our ancestors to public executions and freak 
shows.

What is plastination? It started 25 years ago when Von Hagens, using polymer 
chemistry, pioneered a preservation technique that replaces water in cells with 
plastic material. By 1990, he had plastinated his first whole body - a process 
that requires 1,500 hours' work and costs up to £25,000. The result is an 
odourless, dry, realistic-looking corpse that endures.

Critics have called him a modern-day Frankenstein; some fellow anatomists have 
objected to the show's sensationalist aspects. Worse, some papers quoted the 
Nobel Laureate Günter Grass as saying that Von Hagens was akin to the Nazi 
doctor Josef Mengele. Von Hagens says this quote was manufactured. Despite all 
this, he revels in the fuss. "I don't mind if you're sensationalist in your 
article," he says. "More people will come if you are."

Among the people Von Hagens wants to come to the show are the parents of 
children whose organs were secretly removed after their deaths at the Alder Hey 
children's hospital. John O'Hare, the chairman of the pressure group Pity II 
(Parents who have Interred their Youngsters Twice) has attacked Von Hagens as 
"tasteless and insensitive to the suffering of all of the parents who are still 
going through so much trauma".

Von Hagens is sympathetic: "I can appreciate their reaction. I'm fully behind 
them. They have suffered because part of the medical establishment believes 
that they know better what people should know and what they should see. I 
invite these group leaders to come to the exhibition and I will be happy to 
show them around."

But what serious aims does Von Hagens have? "I want to bring the life back to 
anatomy. I am making the dead lifeful again. This exhibition is a place where 
the dead and the living mix." It is also a place where the living faint at the 
rate of one a day, blanch, and become very quiet and sometimes very upset. 
"Yes, some of the specimens are difficult to look at. To see a mutilated body 
is hard because we have fears about our own integrity. We have a deep-rooted 
anxiety about when we see the body opened up because in this way we have 
feelings about ourselves," concedes Von Hagens. "But at the same time, many 
people who have seen the exhibition have discovered a new respect for their 
bodies. One girl I spoke to said she had tried to commit suicide twice, but 
after seeing the bodies in the exhibition she would never contemplate harming 
it again. It is edutainment." It is edutainment that is open to all. Children 
can attend, and indeed teaching materials - video, catalogue, posters etc - can 
be ordered free of charge by schools.

So far eight million people have seen the exhibition. Among them are the 
singer Tina Turner ("Thank you for such an examination of the human body," she 
wrote), the tennis player Steffi Graf ("I am now able to understand my body in 
a much better way!") and André Agassi ("What an incredible learning 
experience!").

The exhibition has been touring since 1996, earning Von Hagens and his 
Institute of Plastination more than £50m, which is used to finance plastination 
research in Germany, Kyrgyzstan and China. Eventually, he wants to set up a 
permanent Museum of Man, filled with posed plastinations and edifying body 
parts.

Von Hagens sees himself on a global mission to end the elitism of the medical 
profession which, he believes, has denied the lay public access to a better 
understanding of their own bodies. He hankers after the heady days of the 
renaissance and the three centuries thereafter, when anatomists and artists 
explored the workings of the human body as never before and made their workings 
public at anatomical theatres.

"My work continues the scientific tradition whose recurring theme is that 
research should serve the general enlightenment." Thus, Von Hagens regards the 
dissection arenas that opened in Padua in 1594 and Leiden in 1597 as 
predecessors of his Bodyworks exhibition. They were often public examinations 
of the dead, and the presentation of medical scholarship profoundly affected 
human understanding of the nature of the world, and were an inspiration for 
artists such as Dürer and Rembrandt - who was repeatedly drawn to the theme of 
group portraits huddled round a corpse, as in his great painting The Anatomy 
Lesson of Dr Nicolaes Tulp (1632).

Does Von Hagens consider himself an artist, a renaissance man like that other 
artist of human bodies, Leonardo da Vinci? "There are obviously aesthetic 
elements to what I am doing, but I am chiefly a scientist who wants to 
enlighten people by means of aesthetic shock rather than cruelty shock." 
Foetuses are to be exposed in revolving glass cases floored with black velvet, 
bodies are posed artfully, dismembered and reassembled in ways that remind one 
of cubist and surrealist works. This may not be entirely art, but there is a 
visual flourish about Von Hagens' plastinations that many artists would die 
for. Especially British artists.

Von Hagens' exhibition is opening in a country whose most vaunted recent 
artistic movement, Britart, is obsessed with the body - be that the pickled 
sharks and bisected livestock of Damien Hirst, Marc Quinn's frozen-blood head, 
or Rick Gibson's foetus earrings. Von Hagens' exhibition seems to trump all 
those - with the possible exception of the earrings - in its capacity to shock 
and compel attention, and is likely to be as big a cultural draw in London as 
last year's Hayward Gallery exhibition Spectacular Bodies.

Why has body art become so popular in Britain? "I think it is clearly to do 
with the scarcity of bodies," says Von Hagens. "In France and Germany, laws 
were adopted that any unclaimed bodies could be brought for anatomy. There was 
no such law in Great Britain, making bodies very scarce. This scarcity led to 
those terrible murders in Edinburgh and the whole Burke and Hare phenomenon. 
This made the British parliament pass the Anatomy Act, which made it hard for 
people to get bodies for scientific research. This hurt medical science and it 
hurt the general education of people. As a result, there is no public museum of 
anatomy, as there are in Switzerland, Germany and Italy. This has created an 
interest in such art as you are talking about that has become popular in 
Britain."

All the bodies that Von Hagens preserves have been donated, mostly by people 
who declared while living that they would like their bodies to be plastinated 
to advance human knowledge. Each exhibition leads to a flood of volunteers, and 
Von Hagens now has a registry of 3,200 donors. Non-noble reasons given by 
donors have included aversion towards burial or cremation, and the desire to 
save the cost of a funeral. "I know I will feel better this way rather than 
being eaten up and digested by worms," said one.

So plastination offers, perhaps, a new kind of immortality. Will Von Hagens, 
57, end up plastinated? "Of course. I plastinated my best friend recently. He 
was two years older than me. I think about the idea that my human body will 
continue to teach. This is a kind of consolation."


· The Body Worlds exhibition opens at the Atlantis Gallery London E1 on 
Saturday (tel: 0207 053 0000). More information on Von Hagens' work at
www.plastination.com/english/plastination.htm 
<http://www.plastination.com/english/plastination.htm>.
 