
There is a band of buildings, skilful and brave in their design, that will 
feature prominently in future histories of current architecture. Some are world 
famous, some are hugely popular, some represent new ideas surfacing for the 
first time. All share the same badge of honour. They did not win the £20,000
Riba Stirling prize 
<http://www.architecture.com/Awards/RIBAStirlingPrize/RIBAStirlingPrize.aspx>, 
the award for "the architects of the building which has made the greatest 
contribution to British architecture in the past year".

These buildings include the Eden Project in Cornwall, Tate Modern, Selfridges 
in Birmingham, the New Art Gallery in Walsall, Will Alsop's Hotel du Department 
in Marseille, Zaha Hadid's Phaeno Science Centre in Wolfsburg and her BMW 
Central Building in Leipzig. The British Library in St Pancras, London, should 
also have won: although unfashionable and controversial when it opened, its 
quality becomes more apparent with each passing year.

Meanwhile the prize has been awarded to projects that have since subsided into 
obscurity. These include the Magna Centre in Rotherham, whose victory in 2001 
seemed to surprise even its architect, Chris Wilkinson. The prize has an 
instinct for the compromise candidate, for the one least likely to frighten any 
horses.

This year some exceptional buildings haven't even made the shortlist, 
announced last week. One is the Nottingham Contemporary Art Centre by Caruso St 
John, a building that responds professionally to a demanding brief, budget and 
site. It is the work of client and architects who are both good and committed. 
Its galleries are scrupulously designed for the display of art. It deals 
beautifully with sloping terrain, allowing internal and external public routes 
to run through it. More than that, it tries something unusual, which is to see 
how ornament can be used on a modern building. It is clad in pale green 
concrete panels imprinted with lace patterns, creating a play of apparent 
lightness and actual heaviness.

Idea is translated into material, which is something architects should do. 
Nottingham Contemporary stands outside the usual run of decent-but-predictable 
modern architecture of which there is plenty. It is a public, civic building 
that makes a contribution to its city. It is an opportunity to recognise 
buildings north of Watford, which is something Stirling juries sometimes worry 
about, but the opportunity was not taken.

The list also omits the British Embassy in Warsaw by Tony Fretton, who must 
wonder what he has done to upset the Stirling fairy. Last year Fretton was the 
victim of a bizarre and nasty press campaign, which complained that two of the 
five prize judges were predisposed in his favour. This overlooked the fact that 
the other three weren't, or that, year after year, the Stirling jury is loaded 
in favour of the established and middlebrow.

As it turned out, the supposedly biased jury didn't choose Fretton's 
shortlisted entry, the Fuglsang art museum in Denmark. Instead they opted for 
Maggie's Cancer Caring Centre in Hammersmith, London, by Richard Rogers's 
practice, Rogers Stirk Harbour. This is a nice building, but it wasn't pushing 
any boundaries to reward a small project by a 76-year-old already amply 
recognised.

Fretton is not an ingratiating architect. His plain buildings can look 
ordinary in photographs. Nor is he a slick minimalist. What's good about his 
work is the subtle relationships he creates between building, people, landscape 
and – when they are galleries – art. It is surely part of the job of prizes 
like the Stirling to draw attention to the un-obvious, the things whose 
qualities are easily overlooked.

Rather than Nottingham and Warsaw, the shortlist this year's prize includes 
two schools, and a house and studio built by an architect couple for 
themselves. All are good buildings, designed by lovely people, and it's 
possible that the jury wanted to send a message to the government by including 
the schools. Look, they seem to be saying to the school-axing Michael Gove, the 
design of places of learning does matter. But the house doesn't open up new 
ideas the way Nottingham does, or have its public importance, while the prize's 
role is to recognise the best architecture rather than send messages.

Also on the shortlist is the extended Ashmolean museum, Oxford, by Rick Mather 
Architects. This earns its place for the way it organises a complex array of 
galleries behind the museum's original, Grade I-listed building. But it 
displays a cloth ear for materials, structure and detail. Its glass and steel 
balustrades are in jarring shopping-mall moderne, and if the choice was between 
this and Nottingham, the latter should have won.

The good thing about this year's list is that it includes the two projects 
that were always the most likely and deserving winners, Zaha Hadid's MAXXI 
(Museum of 21st Century Arts) in Rome, and the Neues museum in Berlin by David 
Chipperfield with Julian Harrap. The latter is a beautifully poised, 
meticulous, but also creative shaping of a new museum out of the bombed-out 
ruin of an old one. It is a smash hit in its home city. It represents a way of 
doing architecture, where the signature of the architect is not always 
apparent, that breaks with the icon-building of recent years.

MAXXI is a Wagnerian blast from the brass section of the orchestra. It is the 
consummation of years of imagining and fighting for new ways of forming and 
arranging buildings. It has flaws, but it is a magnificent urban experience, a
passeggiata played out on multiple intersecting levels. Hadid, the most famous 
woman architect in history, and possibly the most famous living British 
architect, has never been recognised by the Stirling. In Stirling-think, this 
would be a reason for giving her the prize.

To choose between these two is tough – Berlin just shades it for me – but if 
either wins the Stirling will break its habit of shirking the most powerful 
works. The thing to fear would be a split jury when the winner is chosen in 
October, with a third, compromise candidate surging through. Then the Stirling 
really would have lost all claim to be about the best architecture, as opposed 
to the smooth management of judging committees.
 