
A flurry of shocking pink Lurex, baby-grey ra-ra skirts and stretchy lilac 
leggings fly past the mirror at London's Pineapple Dance Studios. The women 
from Strictly Come Dancing are preparing to show off their favourite Fame-style 
routines. While two of the hoofers (Camilla Dallerup and Karen Hardy) are 
professional, the others are more regular celebrity types - one singer,Alesha 
Dixon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alesha-dixon>, who is also the 
current Strictly champion, and two presenters, Claudia Winkleman, who fronts 
the daily magazine show It Takes Two, and Tess Daly, who hosts the Saturday 
night event with main man Bruce Forsyth. Although they're currently on a break 
- the fifth season is scheduled to be broadcast this autumn - it doesn't take 
these ladies long to reinvigorate their rapport. 'If I had your body Camilla, 
I'd have sex with myself every day,' cheeks Claudia, before cartwheeling across 
the room towards Alesha, who's just jumped on the photographer's back. This 
reunion's not the only reason energies are running high though - the news that 
they're shortlisted for two Baftas (Entertainment Programme and a SKY+ Audience 
Award) has got them dancing on the ceiling. Well, Claudia at least.

Favourite soap moment 

Tess: When Jimmy Corkhill on Brookside took a pill thinking it was a 
painkiller but it was actually a class-A drug. He was raving in his 
living-room, shouting, 'The lights, can you see the lights?' What a great 
character.

Best thing about your job 

Karen: The hundreds of cards I get from women telling me how inspired they 
feel by the show and the thousands of letters I get from men thanking me for 
giving them a reason to stay in with their family on a Saturday night.

Which game show would you like to appear on? 

Alesha: I quite wanted to go on Family Fortunes but I just thought, 'Oh God, 
my family's far too dysfunctional for that.'

TV icon 

Claudia: Jon Snow. I fantasise about having sex with him. He is my dream boy, 
because he's fiercely intelligent and wears a jaunty tie.

Favourite childhood TV 

Camilla: I remember back home in Denmark watching Adrian Mole. Is that weird? 
He was this geeky teenager, wasn't he? I think I identified with him because I 
felt different as a teenager too.

Favourite TV 

Claudia: In the Night Garden, because it makes me feel out of it, but in a 
good way. It's cheaper than Baileys and my kids love it.
 