
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, much like a 
one-night stand, often evokes one of two reactions: slight contempt or 
delirious excitement. I’ve had 38 of them. Christmases, that is. Some were 
forgettable, humdrum but with not enough humbug to be memorable. Thinking about 
others, though, strikes sheer terror into me – there’s been the break-ups (3), 
the suicide attempt (1), and the soul-battering loneliness (at least 10). 
Those, I hope with everything I’ve got, are never to be repeated.

One of the psychiatrists at a hospital where I was an inpatient had a litmus 
test for deciding whether or not someone could be discharged. The question he 
asked himself was, did he feel the patient could get through Christmas and new 
year with their family without resorting to either suicide or homicide? If it 
was a yes, it was OK to discharge. Too many failed the test, and with good 
reason.

Everything is heightened during the festive period. Feeling a bit lonely and 
cash-strapped on a Saturday in July translates into depression and bankruptcy 
in December. And that’s because Christmas and what it represents has become 
some kind of toxic mirage. It’s a men’s magazine’s promise of perfect abs in 
two weeks, a Tinder profile pic.

The reality of many of my past Christmases has been the gently disappointed 
reactions to the presents I give, the inevitable realisation that the 
Disneyfied happy family TV adverts are a total lie (we know that already but on 
Christmas Day we really KNOW it), the weight gain, the six-page credit card 
bills and infuriating self-assembly instructions. Christmas has too often meant 
listening toa message of charity and hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/queens-speech> delivered by someone who 
never carries cash and SITS ON A THRONE, the panicked search for batteries, the 
confused elderly relatives, the endless repeats of both TV and food, the 
brussels bloody sprouts and frankly astonishing numbers of tangerines, the 
drunken arguments, the food shame and hours of passive-aggression.

More painful yet are the (wholly untenable) self-justifications for failing, 
yet again, to accomplish what I wanted that year; justifications that are made 
worse by the utterly ludicrous concept of new year’s resolutions which will 
mean self-hatred with compounded interest at aWonga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wonga>-esque APR due for payment the same 
time next year.

But you know what? This year I can see it all differently. All of this is 
exactly what I’ve now learned to love about Christmas. The imperfection, the 
messiness – it’ll all help to make this festive period the one that changes it 
from fantasy to reality for me. The only way I’ve managed to find some peace in 
this world, at Christmas or otherwise, is by embracing these things. It’s the 
reason I fall more in love with my wife every time I notice a tiny laughter 
line appearing, or when she massacres something that should have been a roast 
chicken. It’s why hearing someone hit a wrong note in a piano recital can 
sometimes improve the experience.

Christmas 2014 will be a cup of tea with my bleary eyed wife, still smelling 
of early morning. It will be watching her laughing with joy at her presents. It 
will be a few hundred quid spent making sure a few homeless people are going to 
getthree hot meals and a bed <https://www.theguardian.com/crisis-at-christmas>. 
I’m even looking forward to the onslaught of family dysfunction, dodgy gifts 
and sugar-addicted kids.

After all of the shockers I’ve experienced in the past, give me the 
not-quite-rightness of this messy Christmas a thousand times over. Because I 
should be so goddam lucky.
 