
Those who glimpse Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> 
only through the pressured two-week prism of Wimbledon fortnight may have 
struggled to square the relaxed, energised individual on show during successive 
victories in Melbourne this week with the surly Scot of popular imagination.

But the emergence of what his advisers might term Murray mark 3 - sporting new 
Adidas gear, minus his former long-term girlfriend and with boxer Ricky Hatton 
joining his mother Judy and the rest of Team Murray to cheer him on - is the 
latest evidence of a transformation that experts claim will turn him into a 
potential global sporting star.

Simon Fuller, the Spice Girls impresario who became one of the most powerful 
men in showbiz via Pop Idol and David Beckham, and is now Murray's manager 
after signing him up to his 19 Entertainment stable last year, said today it 
was Murray's determination to succeed that set him apart.

"It is Andy's single-minded vision to be the very best that I find so 
impressive in a person so young. He has pure determination and tenacity unlike 
anyone I have ever met before. Andy is also an incredibly decent guy," said 
Fuller. "There really is no limit to how far he can go in this sport."

The final step in his metamorphosis could come Sunday, when he steps on to the 
Rod Laver arena to take on Roger Federer in an attempt to become the first 
British man for 74 years to win a single's title in one of the four majors.

Murray was regularly near the top of polls among younger fans even when he was 
causing the SW19 set to grumble into their G&Ts with his unruly mop, sometimes 
petulant demeanour and infamous quip that he wanted anyone but England to win 
the 2006 World Cup.

His authenticity and a penchant for Twitter, boxing and martial arts, video 
games and practical jokes helped him appeal to a younger demographic than many 
of his rivals ‑ and far beyond those who would usually take an interest in 
tennis.

The defining image of his march to his second Grand Slam final was the primal 
roar he let out in his semi-final victory over Marin Cilic after haring after a 
lob and spinning to deliver a stunning passing shot.

"Andy's matured a great deal in the last 12 months. His confidence and 
self-belief is impressive for his age. He's an intelligent player and his 
all-around game continues to improve at a spectacular rate," said Fuller.

"He is very focused, he knows exactly what he wants and will make any 
sacrifice to be the world's number one player."

Eyebrows were raised when Fuller signed Murray to his 19 stable last year. 
Many from the sports world had expected Murray to sign with an established 
global sports agency such as IMG, which represents Federer and Tiger Woods and 
courted him heavily, while many in the entertainment world wondered whether 
Murray had the raw material to become a global star.

The first step was to apply more commercial savvy to his promotional deals. 
Murray's advisers were incredulous when they found that the shirts he wore were 
not available in the shops.

Adidas, with its global reach, will be a powerful tool in the rebranding 
project. It has heritage in tennis - with Stan Smith, Ivan Lendl, Steffi Graf 
and Stefan Edberg - but has lost ground in recent years. Others are banking on 
a Murray victory to do what tens of millions of pounds of investment from the 
LawnTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association and endless 
handwringing has failed to produce, and begin to inspire a new generation of 
British stars.

Team Murray

Miles Maclagan, coach

In his own words, Maclagan is charged with "getting Andy to fulfil his 
potential on the court". He arranges and runs practice sessions as well as 
breaking down film of all his matches and offering technical advice. Maclagan 
also looks after logistics on tour.

Alex Corretja, coach

Fills in for Maclagan when he is away and can offer different perspectives in 
training even when the player's full-time coach is around. Set to work with 
Murray for about 20 weeks this year.

Matt Little, strength and conditioning coach

Oversees Murray's fitness training and in particular works to help him avoid 
injuries. Little keeps Murray on a rigorous stretching programme all season and 
looks after his recovery routine after matches. Also responsible for ­ensuring 
Murray eats properly on tour.

Jez Green, physical conditioner

Plans the British No 1's fitness programme. Has helped Murray to increase his 
upper body strength through an aggressive regime of weightlifting and chin-ups. 
Puts Murray through a month-long boot camp in the off-season to build up 
strength and fitness.

Andy Ireland, physio­therapist

Offers corrective treatment throughout the season to help Murray fix any 
­muscle imbalances, inflexibility and weakness as soon as it begins to develop. 
Addressing these problems swiftly helps Murray to avoid more significant 
injuries as the season goes on.

Judy Murray, his mum

First encouraged him to pick up a racket at two and helped take the crucial 
decision to send him to Sanchez-Casal academy in Spain at 15, rather than see 
him progress through the cosy LTA system. Can usually be seen loudly 
encouraging him from the players' box.

Murraymania: how to jump on the bandwagon

What you'll see

High definition close-up of the inside of Murray's mouth frozen in a vast and 
surprisingly rectangular primal scream.

Do say "A potentially vital momentum-switching point at the end of that 
hair-raising 13-stroke full-stretch rally."

Don't say "Are those gold fillings?"

What you'll see

Commentator says: "Mmmmmm the cross-court whipped forehand drive" as ball 
successfully whumped out of reach of smouldering head-banded Swiss.

Do say "The Murray forehand has truly become a weapon in its own right, this 
could be a vital component of any attempt to outflank the incomparable 
one-handed Federer backhand."

Don't say "Shall we switch to the Andrew Marr show?"

What you'll see

Number-one fan leaping about clenching fist and baring teeth in frightening 
manner. Commentator says: "Judy Murray, ever-present in the box."

Do say "Not all tennis parents are overbearing or intrusive."

Don't say "I bet she buys his clothes."

What you'll see

Gaggle of teenagers in ginger wigs and tam o'shanters waving inanely and 
holding cardboard signs saying "Murray maniacs!!"

Do say "Wonderful to see the Murray army out in full support. Get intae 'im!"

Don't say "You want to help but they'll just spend it on drink."

Barney Roney
 