
On 3 March 1924, the Dolmabahçe Palace in Istanbul was surrounded by 
Republican Turkish troops. Inside, the last Ottoman caliph,Abdülmecid II 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd%C3%BClmecid_II>, was reading the essays of 
Montaigne. Late that night, the prefect of police came to tell him that 
Ataturk's new assembly in Ankara had just voted to abolish the caliphate and 
that he was to leave the country at dawn.

Photographs of the last caliph show an elderly, intellectual figure in a fez, 
kaftan and pince-nez, absorbed in the books of his library. Here he composed 
classical music and read the complete works of Victor Hugo, while cultivating 
his gardens and painting portraits of his family. But the following morning, he 
and his family were escorted into exile in Europe aboard the Orient Express, 
eventually settling in Nice. He was never allowed to return.

A few years later, the last caliph was spotted by the correspondent of Time 
magazine. "He may be seen strolling with a mien of great dignity along the 
beach near Nice," the reporter wrote, "attired in swimming trunks only, 
carrying a large parasol."

His daughter married into the family of the Nizam of Hyderabad, and whatever 
the dreams of the Islamic world, there has been little interest among 
Abdülmecid's family to revive the office that Ataturk took from them.

In the absence of a descendant to fill the vacancy, the position of caliph was 
claimed by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/06/mosul-video-purports-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-islamic-state>
 during midday prayers just over a week ago in Mosul. Al-Baghdadi is the 
elusive leader ofIsis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, the group 
formerly known as Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which has 
self-contracted itself into the Islamic State.

Clad in black robes, al-Baghdadi cut a rather different figure from his 
predecessor, whose favourite reading was the Revue des Deux Mondes. Instead, 
during his hour-long sermon in which "Caliph Ibrahim" announced his elevation, 
the only literary references given were to the Qur'an and the Hadiths.

The restoration of the caliphate has been a dream of Islamic revivalists since 
at least the 1950s, when Hizb ut-Tahrir began calling for its resurrection. The 
Taliban leader Mullah Omar went as far as claiming for himself one of the 
caliph's traditional titles,Amir al-Mu'minin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amir_al-Mu%27minin>, the commander of the 
believers; the restoration of the caliphate was often mentioned by Osama bin 
Laden as his ultimate goal.

But al-Baghdadi is the first Islamic leader since Abdülmecid to take the 
title, which, for many Muslims, distils deep millennial dreams of a great, 
just, pure multinational empire of faith – the nearest thing the Islamic world 
has ever seen, so the Islamists will insist, to heaven on Earth. Nostalgia for 
this lost world is directly associated with the golden age of early Islam, when 
under the leadership of the first four caliphs – the successors [of Muhammad] –
Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> expanded from the Hejaz out 
through the Levant to borders of Sindh in the east and southern France in the 
west.

As Edward Gibbon put it in one of his most celebrated passages: "A victorious 
line of march had been prolonged from the Rock of Gibraltar to the banks of the 
Loire; the repetition of an equal space would have carried the Saracens to the 
confines of Poland and the Highlands of Scotland; the Rhine is not more 
impassable than the Nile, and the Arabian fleet might have sailed into the 
mouth of the Thames. Perhaps the interpretation of the Qur'an would now be 
taught in the schools of Oxford, and her pulpits might demonstrate to a 
circumcised people the truth of the Revelation of Mahomet."

Yet, beyond this first century, the history of the caliphate is far more 
troubled, bloody and contested than many realise. For most of Islamic history 
the title of caliph has been disputed by a succession of Muslim leaders who 
were anxious to give sacral legitimacy to conquests already achieved – what the 
Israelis like to call "facts on the ground". As ever in the Middle East, 
religion is a useful mask assumed by the powerful as a way of holding on to 
power.

By the early 10th century, the title of caliph was contested by the two 
leading Islamic polities of their day – the Shia Fatamid empire based in Cairo 
and the Sunni Abbasid caliphate of Baghdad. After Baghdad fell to the Mongols 
in 1261 and the last Abbasid caliph died in the sack of the city, the title was 
claimed by the Mameluks in Egypt on the basis of one stray descendant of the 
last Abbasid who had made his way to Cairo.

When the Ottomans took Mameluk Egypt in 1517, they claimed the caliphate for 
themselves, though this was soon disputed by their rivals, the Great Mughals of 
India. In 1579, the Mughal emperor, Akbar, declared himself khalifatu'l-zaman, 
the caliph of his time, and khalifa remained one of the imperial title of the 
Mughals right up to 1858, when the last Mughal, Bahadur Shah Zafar, was packed 
off to exile in Rangoon by the British.

In addition to these imperial leaders of huge Muslim empires, throughout 
Islamic history there has been a succession of eccentric millennial Islamist 
mystics who have briefly declared themselves caliph – the leaders of the Sokoto 
caliphate in 19th century Nigeria, for example – before being declared 
heretical and falling from power.

It is too early to say to which of these traditions al-Baghdadi belongs and 
whether Isis represents a brief interlude of Islamist anarchy or marks the 
beginning of a permanent new jihadistan which will succeed in establishing 
itself on the map.

Nevertheless, for all the eccentricity of the self-declaration or its flimsy 
legal basis, it cannot but have great resonance through the Islamic world, 
coming at a moment of such destabilisation, with Syria and Iraq ablaze, Egypt 
restive and Israel slaughtering the people of Gaza afresh. It will inevitably 
attract jihadis from across the globe to the Isis banner.

It is no comfort that the terrible tragedy of Iraq is entirely a mess of our 
own creation.
 