
Britain’s growth rate returned to Mach 2 speed in the spring and early summer. 
That’s the consensus among City analysts ahead of official figures out this 
week, handing George Osborne another golden arrow with which to shoot down his 
critics.

It is the re-emergence of the big-spending consumer (who snaps up a new bed 
and sofa while ordering a case of wine) that is likely to have prevented the UK 
economy from repeating the lacklustre growth rate of 0.4% seen in the first 
three months of the year.

Most analysts expect the Office for National Statistics to report on Tuesday 
that GDP jumped by 0.7% for the three months to the end of June. That’s an 
annualised GDP increase of 2.8%, which is enough to put supersonic Britain 
streets ahead of its developed-world rivals.

Yet a peek beneath the data reveals a picture that Osborne and the 
interest-rate-setters in Threadneedle Street ignore at their peril.

Based on what we already know from the official figures and those published 
for individual industry sectors, the main boost to the second quarter figures 
will come from the very same source of weakness in the first quarter – the 
North Sea.

Last year saw a dive in North Sea oil and gas production as operators reacted 
to the dramatic fall in crude oil prices. In recent months, rigs taken out of 
action for maintenance have come back on stream, encouraged by a moderate 
recovery in prices (though they are falling again now, along with other 
commodities) and a more generous tax regime announced by Osborne in the March 
budget. The result was an enormous 9% increase in output between the first and 
second quarters.

If rates go up in November or possibly next February, the betting must be that 
they will soon come down again

Making matters worse, manufacturing is in the doldrums. Since last summer, 
growth has slowed to a point where output was actually lower than the year 
before (down 0.4% from May 2014 to May 2015 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/iop/index-of-production/may-2015/stb-iop-may-2015.html#tab-Production-and-sectors-supplemetary-analysis>
). Great hopes for pharmaceuticals makers, specialist textiles and machinery 
manufacture have been dashed. Mining and quarrying is in decline and metal 
smelting has all but disappeared.

Filling some of the void are the stellar motor and aerospace industries, which 
prevent Britain’s manufacturing from being limited to the output of a few niche 
products. The services sector is also doing its bit: from hotels and leisure to 
the health sector and online shopping, businesses are expanding and taking on 
more workers. They are even reporting skills shortages despite there still 
being more than 1.8 million unemployed. Pay has also rebounded and, according 
to official figures, wage growth is averaging 3.2% while inflation remains 
flat, giving workers a welcome income boost. So that’s a dose of good news at 
least.

Is it enough to warrant a smile on Tory faces? Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> policymakers seem 
to think so. They are preparing to raise interest rates in the expectation that 
higher real wages will send inflation rocketing. But those among the nine 
monetary policy committee members who prefer to ignore weaknesses in the UK’s 
growth story are likely to be embarrassed. If rates go up in November or 
possibly next February, the betting must be that they will soon come down again.

With higher interest rates must come a higher pound. It is already strong 
against the euro; if there is another surge on the foreign exchange markets, 
billions of pounds’ worth of exports could be priced out by cheaper 
competition. Much of this loss will be felt by manufacturers. GDP will suffer.

More importantly for the MPC’s inflation-watchers, a higher pound will make 
imports cheaper and bring down prices, which resurrects the threat of deflation 
and thus the need for an interest rate cut.

The embarrassment of cutting back rates after a bold rise is something the 
Swedes and Canadians know all about. Their central bankers tried it and – in 
the case of Sweden – now have negative interest rates for their trouble. So 
surely it would be better for the MPC to hold fire. Then the UK’s still-weak 
economic recovery can keep climbing.

Tories need to get climate change story straight

Amber Rudd, the energy and climate change secretary, is a true Janus: the 
Roman god famous for facing in two directions at the same time. In her first 
major speech on global warming on Friday, Rudd insisted climate change was a 
dangerous threat she took most seriously and which would be tackled for the 
sake of families and businesses alike.

But this was the same Rudd who earlier in the week had overseen the scrapping 
of the Green Deal scheme to make homes more energy efficient and the end of 
certain solar subsidies.

She has already scrapped financial aid for onshore wind – the cheapest of all 
renewable energy technologies – and has overseen the lowering of taxes on 
polluting companies while ending tax breaks on cleaner cars.

Most of these measures, argues Rudd, can be taken because the subsidy schemes 
are not working properly or because wind and solar are so successful they don’t 
need support anymore.

She also claims to be standing up for “hard-working families” by cutting 
energy bills. Rudd also wants to see free-market solutions, not state or 
consumer-funded ones – although different rules seem to apply to nuclear power.

But many see an ideological cuts agenda barely concealed behind 
consumer-champion rhetoric. It is true the Conservatives publicly promised to 
be the “greenest government ever”, but privately admitted it wanted rid of “the 
green crap” .

The real truth is that tackling global warming costs money, even if more of 
the cost comes via the taxpayer than through higher energy bills. But we need 
to pay now rather than leave subsequent generations to face the devastating and 
much more costly impact later on.

Global warming is a threat that has not been and cannot be tackled by any pure 
free-market solution. It cannot be driven by companies worried about 
three-monthly financial cycles, or be achieved in a world where fossil fuels do 
not pay for the damage they cause.

For a party that claims to support business and the commercial imperative, it 
is also astonishing to see the rug being pulled from under the renewable energy 
industry just as this job-creating sector really takes off.

Should Hornby be derailed?


A parliamentary commission into who was to blame for the near-collapse of HBOS 
in 2008 said the bank’s chief executiveAndy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> had “proved unable or 
unwilling to change course” to save it from bankruptcy.

It is not yet known what a report by the City regulators into the debacle will 
conclude, as it is long-delayed and no publication date is in sight. But 
shareholders have always maintained that there should never again be a place 
for Hornby on the board of a listed company. Since 2011 he has been chief 
executive of bookmaker Gala Coral. While it was privately owned, that was no 
problem. On Friday itmerged with Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/ladbrokes-and-gala-coral-to-merge>
 to become a market-listed business. Hornby will not be on the main board, but 
will be chief operating officer. It is now up to City shareholders to decide if 
he should be given a second chance.
 