
Weirdly, it was then thought, Tony Blair chose to launch his 2001 manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/may/12/uk.conservatives2> in a 
school: St Saviour's and St Olave's, Southwark. Perhaps forgetting the 
traditional affinity between deranged leaders and parties of dumbstruck 
children, Clare Short said it was an "odd" thing to do. Simon Hughes thought it 
"bizarre". Alastair Campbell, having choreographed the show, complained that 
the media "were pretty cynical about the whole event". But it worked well 
enough for his rivals to want to copy the technique, minus the time-consuming 
prayers and hymns, and to use it repeatedly ever since.

Nowadays, it's the press conference which has no blameless human wallpaper 
that looks faintly wrong. Were there problems with the police-check? Why, 
otherwise, would a visionary not want to emulate Blair, Michelle Obama and 
David Cameron, and recruit a sea of juvenile extras to reinforce the message of 
hope and transformation, or in the Queen or Gordon Brown's case, unguessed-at 
reserves of vivacity? Within the last week, Scottish teens have showcased what 
a playful prime minister we've just lost, while in a London college pre-voters 
massed around Nick Clegg, who needed something to illustrate "the biggest 
shake-up of our democracy" since the Great Reform Act.

But it's when something suspect or disreputable needs to be sanitised, that 
youth scenery comes into its own. Tasked with passing off his grotesque Olympic 
mascots as a piece of premier British design,Lord Coe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-coe> commissioned two of the 
world's most trusted cynicism deflectors: a crowd of primary school children 
and an endorsement by Michael Morpurgo. Old enough to say "it's cool" to 
reporters, but too young to condemn an aesthetic outrage, Coe's children also 
embodied the revised Olympic message: it's totally about kids. The designer's 
brief, we learned, was "to create mascots that would excite and inspire young 
people and encourage them to get involved in sport". Wenlock, named after the 
Shropshire site of Britain's first Olympic revival, was a special token of this 
idealistic commitment. Along with his mate, the puppet is expected to raise 
£15m for Coe's organising committee.

"By linking young people to the values of sport", his lordship announced, "
Wenlock and Mandeville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/may/21/olympic-mascots-wenlock-mandeville>
 will help inspire kids to strive to be the best they can be." Thus, the more 
the school children contradicted the only possible adult response to these role 
models (that of reflexive disgust) the more they confirmed that the games are, 
already, generating near-spiritual fervour in the next generation.

What does it matter if adults can only see a pair of bifurcated mobile phones, 
with Mandeville's eye-catching groin definition creepily hinting at of 
mascottian oestrus or, possibly, a urinary tract infection? The characters were 
not designed to please grown-ups, any more than those comparative beauties, 
Iggle Piggle fromIn the Night Garden, or Waybuloo's Nok Tok. If years of 
CBeebies has taught us anything, it's that the more outlandish the 
puppet-friend, the more beneficial its company will prove to child development. 
Coe's mascots may have much to teach us. In a world where we so often judge by 
appearance, for instance, there is perhaps a virtue in promoting these pitiful 
creatures that is also consistent with a logo, opening parade and metal tower 
which promise to make the London games the ugliest in Olympic history. Other 
than that, however, Coe's "values of sport", as mediated by the mascots, remain 
elusive, even contradictory. The mascots tell children to "be the best they can 
be". Yet, as children saw in the Beijing Olympics, being the best you can be is 
not as good as winning. Far from it. Even 14-year-old British diver,Tom Daley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tomdaley>, who impressed supporters just by 
being there, looked distraught after his best efforts failed, as the Canadians 
like to put it, to own the podium.

No wonder he was anxious: the head of UK sport, John Steele 
<http://www.morethanthegames.co.uk/bobsleigh-skeleton/019568-uk-sport-chief-admits-solitary-medal-disappointing>
, described the spectacle of British athletes striving but not winning in 
Vancouver as "disappointing". It was great, of course, thatAmy Williams won gold
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2010/feb/20/winter-olympics-2010-amy-williams-gold>
: "But it did represent the bottom of the medal range. We are not going to 
sugar-coat the fact that on the targets we set we'd like to have seen closer to 
the middle of the range."

Targets? Although Wenlock and Mandeville were happy, in their first episode, 
to scamper about in front of the telly, they will soon, no doubt, be explaining 
to children why there is no point in a mascot, even an elite one, jumping out 
of a window and setting off along a publicly funded rainbow if it doesn't have 
a track record of finding pots of gold. Where 2012 is concerned, sports 
officials have decided that a fourth place for Britain would be respectable, 
requiring the winning of 17 gold medals, following appropriate investment. 
Swimming and cycling are the sports best placed to satisfy these patriots with 
an improved "market share" of the glory, to use the National Audit Office term.

"The athletes need to be world class to earn extra funding," says Steele, "and 
we are not here to bail out sports which cannot govern themselves correctly but 
reward those who show potential." Lots of sports, school children will gather 
from his grim analysis, are such a waste of space that it's no wonder there's 
nowhere to play them. In fact, any young people who feel inspired by Lord Coe's 
twinkling mascots to pursue their own Olympic dream should probably have 
another think.

It's not for everyone, sport. It's for winners. "Medals are the aim of our 
funding as we have a responsibility to the British public," Steele explains, 
though the public was never actually consulted on its investment in his empire. 
"It is crucial to get as many athletes on the podium as possible."

Although staging this celebration of international fellowship evidently adds 
to the pressure to beat everyone else, home advantages are thought to offer the 
host six or seven extra gold medals it might not otherwise have won (which 
would price ours, I think, at around £1.3bn each). Along with a few east London 
sports facilities this would, unlike the claimed enhancement of our young folk, 
at least be an identifiable part of the "legacy" to which Lord Coe and his 
fellow sports officials incessantly refer.

They must be unaware that the builders of the Dome, which was also justified 
as an inspiration to the nation's youth, long ago showed that reliance on this 
word, outside the context of wills, dependably identifies both the speaker and 
the alleged inheritance as worthless. Back then, Labour would not listen, and 
the Tories became lucky bystanders at the historic immolation of public funds.

Did they learn anything at all? If so, it is not too late to purge the coming 
games of their most egregious flourishes and waste. And if not, let these 
mascots be a warning.
 