
Before a note of music has been played, this Africa Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> gig can be considered 
something of a miracle. Over the past week, a bunch of 80 African and western 
musicians have been touring Britain by chartered train, performing nightly 
shows while spending every spare waking second visiting schools, hospitals and 
bandstands to play impromptu pop-up gigs (one involved beatboxer, an Ethiopian 
group with a six-stringed lyre, and the Hebden Bridge Junior Brass Band).

Given how hard it is to get four band members into a tour van at the same 
time, you'd imagine by now there would have been some kind of disaster. 
Distressed-looking Congolese funk troupes wandering around Carlisle city 
centre, perhaps, or at least the odd kora discarded on Hebden Bridge high 
street. But no, the tour's gone frighteningly smoothly, making tonight's show 
at London's Granary Square (the first major concert at the open-air space 
behind King's Cross station) a celebratory affair.

By the end, Paul McCartney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney> 
and John Paul Jones will have graced the stage, with Africa Express enthusiast 
Rio Ferdinand cheering on from the aisles. But it starts softly with two Malian 
musicians, Afel Bocoum and ngoni player Bassekou Kouyate, and it's left for 
Ghanaian rapper M.anifest to get the crowd's arms aloft. But it's a riotous 
version of Dead Prez's Hip Hop (featuring rappers Kano, Bashy and M.anifest 
again, plus Martina Topley-Bird) that really gets things going. Even taking 
into account Africa Express's festival-stealing Glastonbury 2007 show, this one 
feels like the high point of an idea that was first conceived by Damon Albarn 
and an assortment of music managers, journos, producers and promoters – the aim 
being to unite western and African musicians.

It's a feat that shouldn't be underestimated. On the train, and on stage on 
Saturday night, are some huge stars of African music: spellbinding singer 
Fatoumata Diawara, Malian guitarist Amadou and Senegalese superstar Baaba Maal, 
who claimed midway through the tour that this was the best project he'd ever 
been involved in. All set out hoping to exchange musical ideas with the likes 
of the M1 from Dead Prez, Rizzle Kicks, Lucy Rose, Carl Barat and Yeah Yeah 
Yeahs guitarist Nick Zinner – and that's exactly what they did.

Tonight's highlights swing from the Krar Collective's charged collaboration 
with rappers Afrikan Boy and Rye Rye to a crowd-silencing version of the 
Gorillaz track Melancholy Hill, featuring Malian singer Rokia Traoré.

As the train left Euston station last Sunday, Albarn told me that the plan was 
to start things scratchily and build towards a stellar climax. You could argue 
it didn't go quite to plan, as every other night of the tour – Middlesbrough, 
Glasgow, Manchester, Cardiff and Bristol – has been completely enthralling too, 
sheer enthusiasm overcoming the fact that many of these songs are being played 
with barely a rehearsal, worked out live on stage.

The joyous spirit has been shared by everyone – from the crowds each night to 
the startled commuters standing on various platforms as the train whizzed by, 
beats and bongos blazing from a specially designed rehearsal carriage 
(including mixing desk and an ear-splittingly loud speaker system). Even the 
onboard staff seem overwhelmed – train manager Steve Finn admitted as much: 
"This is the best thing we'll ever do … next week we're back to transporting 
nuclear waste."

Back on stage and the surprises are being pulled out one by one. When Rokia 
Traoré plays Dounia, her backing band features not just John Paul Jones but 
also Paul McCartney. Backstage, McCartney says he wishes he could have been on 
the train. "I've loved African music for years," he enthuses. "I went to Lagos 
in the 70s and came back friends with Fela Kuti, so I've always wanted to do an 
Africa Express show."

The Beatle has taken a bit of a kicking recently for "overexposure", as if 
publicly playing Hey Jude a few too many times somehow cancels out the fact 
he's one of the greatest songwriters of all time. Yet Africa Express paces it 
perfectly, slipping him on stage around 10pm. Coming Up is a great song choice, 
utilising the kind of repetitive, funky backdrop that Damon, Gruff Rhys and 
guitarist Seye can jam wildly over. Gruff and Damon hold up signs saying "ape 
shit" and "tax the rich" to wild cheers. Then Goodnight Tonight arrives with a 
stellar African line-up: Amadou, Fatoumata Diawara, Tony Allen and more – all 
sharing the stage with Macca. Clearly there are no stars here, just musicians – 
and you can't even spot John Paul Jones during a Kano-led run through Kashmir. 
It ends with everyone on stage for Amadou's Masiteladi.

This seems to be the ethos of Africa Express – it's not about who's on stage, 
but the joy emanating from it.
 