
Chris Howes went to the show as a 12th birthday treat for his gadget-obsessed 
eldest son. But he ended up buying a strange new gizmo for himself - 
menthol-flavoured electronic cigarettes.

Howes, a retired sports centre worker from Bedford, smokes 30 a day. He had 
tried everything to ditch the habit, including acupuncture, patches and gum. He 
reckoned the electronic fags might just work. "It tastes like you're having a 
proper cigarette and it feels like one as well," he said after exhaling a puff 
of nicotine-flavoured vapour.

When he inhaled a green light came on at the tip of the cigarette, or E-Lites 
as they are called. The plastic smokes, which are addictive but otherwise 
harmless, provide a nicotine hit from a clever-sounding atomiser inside. They 
come with a charger, and after that they are £1.40 for a pack of 20.

The E-Lites were just one of many odd innovations launched at the first Gadget 
Show Live <http://www.gadgetshowlive.net/>, an exhibition at Birmingham's NEC 
based on the Channel Five TV programme. Money worries have forced many to look 
for a more pared-down lifestyle, but this was the place to come to see how 
manufacturers hope to tempt us into spending again.

Hundreds of visitors queued yesterday before the doors opened. First in line 
were Andrew and Andrea Ronan and their teenage boys, Declan and Callum, from 
Guiseley, near Leeds. "We love technology. If we had more money we'd have more 
technology," said Andrew, a menswear salesman.

The organisers are expecting 30,000 people over the three-day event, which was 
sold out weeks ago. Yesterday the biggest attractions were computer games and 
the Grand Prix Experience, a pod the size of a white van that simulates driving 
a formula one car. There was also the world's first power-assisted suitcase, a 
bag on wheels that you have to hold back to stop it clipping your heels. A 
£3,800 chair offered eight different types of massages such as "stiff 
shoulders" and "night time". For those struggling to cope with the excitement 
there was a display of anoraks that don't steam up. Damian Hennessey, a product 
designer from Reading, was trying out the Gocycle. It looked like a version of 
the Sinclair C5, and appeared to combine the vulnerabilities of cycling without 
the benefit of exercise or indeed economy. It is going on sale for £1,198.

But Hennessey wanted one. "It's really cool," he said. "It's a strange 
sensation, the way it pulls you along - 15mph is faster than you think."
 