
The overwhelming impression you get upon entering the studio in Camden, north 
London, where SirAnthony Caro <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro> 
has worked for 40 years, is of physicality and weight. Great battered sheets of 
rusting metal are stacked outside in the courtyard, surrounded by girders and 
heavy machine parts. Inside the large, noisy workshop, Caro's small team of 
assistants takes on hulking artworks with hammers and angle-grinders. But at 
85, is Caro - one of the most influential sculptors in modern times - still 
able to engage with his pieces physically?

"Absolutely," he says. "The crowd around me are terrific and I don't have to 
do as much lifting as I used to, but nor do I just make drawings and say, 
'That's what I want.' For me," he insists, "it has to be tangible."

Caro's prolific career stretches back almost six decades. Last year, he 
finished major work on a war-damaged chapel in Bourbourg, northern France, 
which involved erecting two high towers of oak, a concrete baptismal font and a 
series of wood, steel and terracotta sculptures.

"I would like to keep going as long as possible," he says, noting that his 
mother lived to 100. "I come down [to the studio] every morning by and large. 
It's a way of life."

His wife, the artist Sheila Girling, paints in the building next door. They 
have lunch every day at a long oak table in a room beneath her studio which 
contains pieces of both of their work, but they tend not to stray into each 
other's workspace unless an opinion is asked for.

Caro has the demeanour of a much younger man. "Touch wood," he says, "I'm very 
happy with my health. I had a stroke a few years ago - small strokes - so I'm a 
little more careful now." He gets tired more easily and sometimes his memory 
acts up on him. "You walk into a room and forget why you went in there. But it 
doesn't happen in the studio. The focus is there and it's just like it always 
has been."

The key to a healthy old age, he says, is continuing to work and "doing 
something you like doing. You're so much more likely to go on living if you're 
happy, and making art makes us both happy." London, where he has lived since he 
married Sheila 60 years ago, has been another important factor. "Old people are 
really a pain in the neck and one of the joys of living in London is that you 
see young people. You could isolate yourself and be less stressed, but one of 
the pleasures is seeing what's going on."

Caro was knighted in 1987 and in 2000 was the first British sculptor since 
Henry Moore to receive the Order of Merit. But he doesn't like to dwell on past 
achievements.

"I like to think about tomorrow rather than yesterday."
 