Which action movie star said of the Rio Games: “It’s a sore point I never got 
to the Olympics. They got seven million for the diving per year. They deserve 
it. The divers now are just terrific. I started too late. I should have done a 
different sport.”  Jason Statham  Arnold Schwarzenegger  Dolph Lundgren  
Jean-Claude Van Damme Which footballing icon did Twentieth Century Fox use to 
promote its movies Independence Day: Resurgence, X-Men Apocalypse Now and 
Deadpool?  Wayne Rooney  Geoff Hurst  Ryan Giggs  Alan Mullery Who of the 
following did not have a cameo in Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie?  Christopher 
Biggins  Judith Chalmers  Sophie Raworth  Ruth Langsford Which director 
responded to poor reviews by quoting Emiliano Zapata: “Prefiero morir de pie 
que vivir siempre arrodillado” (“I’d rather die on my feet than live on my 
knees”).  Steven Spielberg  David Ayer  Werner Herzog  Ken Loach Which film 
came top of the BBC’s critics poll of the best 100 films released this century? 
 Wong Kar-wai’s In The Mood For Love  Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s Uncle Boonmee 
Who Can Recall His Past Lives  Ben Kellett’s Mrs Brown’s Boys D’ Movie  David 
Lynch’s Mulholland Drive Which film won the Palme d’Or at the Cannes film 
festival?  Maren Ade’s Toni Erdmann  Andrea Arnold’s American Honey  Ken 
Loach’s I, Daniel Blake  Mrs Brown’s Boys D’Movie Which film did Tory 
leadership contender Andrea Leadsom declare to be her all-time favourite?  Four 
Weddings and a Funeral  Funeral in Berlin  The Funeral  Death at a Funeral 
Which star landed the lead role in the Lara Croft movie reboot?  Mia Wasikowska 
 Alicia Vikander  Mila Kunis  Rebel Wilson How much money did the Emma Watson 
movie The Colony take in its first week at the UK box office?  £47bn  £47m  £47 
 47p Which veteran of the Alien movies had a cameo in the new animation Finding 
Dory?  Sigourney Weaver  Ian Holm  Bill Paxton  Harry Dean Stanton  You got…  
You win a Golden Globe  You win a Razzie  You win an Oscar  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers 
0-4 correct answers: Razzie

5-7 correct answers: Golden Globe

8-10 correct answers: Oscar
 