
The apparent success of a new form of therapy is indeed a “cheering message 
for families”, but there have always been good child-therapist interactions 
that have ameliorated the autism condition (Autism trial reports improved 
behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/25/autisc-children-therapy-method-potential-breakthrough-care-preschool-autism-communication-trial>
, 26 October). If Victor, the wild boy of Aveyron of 1800, was part civilised 
by the pedagogue Jean Marc Gaspard Itard, the history of successful 
interventions is indeed long but lacked the theoretical underpinning of proof 
until now. When the National Autistic Society, as it now is, was formed in 
1962, in the forefront of the parents’ aims was early diagnosis, early 
intervention, and focused therapy in the form of education designed to overcome 
the manifold disabilities in communication. Good teachers, good therapists, 
have always been few; and parents who had time, energy and application were 
also few. More than 54 years of autism education in the UK – by, for example, 
teachers in NAS schools, local authority special schools, Camphill (Rudolf 
Steiner) schools, often working with parents – has achieved amazing advances in 
behaviour, though such advances often begged the question of the 
mildness/severity of the disorder in the first place.

The conventional psychiatric medical diagnosis of the 1960s was too often that 
if an autistic child did not speak by the age of seven he or she never would. 
Too often it was not so much the problem of the child but of the teacher who 
had not yet developed the skills to understand a child with complex disorders. 
Film and video (in short, technology) have now come to the aid of therapists. 
Though autism is a lifelong neurological disorder, and outcomes vary strikingly 
between those classified as “learning disabled” and those who are not, the
University of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofmanchester> trial tends to 
prove at last the rightness of the work of dedicated, often unsung, teachers of 
the past. One must hope that education and therapy can only get better and more 
families benefit from them.
Michael Baron 
Co-founder, NAS, and its chairman from 1962 to 1967, London

• The long-term study by Professor Jonathan Green is welcome evidence not only 
that early, targeted intervention with young children with autism is extremely 
efficacious but also that it has lasting benefits. Portage services (most 
attached to education services of local authorities) are a hidden gem that 
provide this intervention to toddlers and children under five with autism and 
other additional needs, parent-training and video included just as in the 
trial. Parents whose children have made huge cognitive and social leaps know 
about Portage. They praise the service and tell each other about it. We can 
only hope that, despite the marginalisation and sidelining of local 
authorities, these services will continue.
Rina Picciotto
Retired Portage service manager, Hackney 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 