
On 12 October 1944, Frank Sinatra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-sinatra> opened his third season at 
New York's Paramount theatre. It was Columbus Day, a public holiday, and the 
bobby-soxers turned out in force. The famed New York photographer Weegee 
(Arthur Fellig) was there with his camera and notebook, capturing the scene in 
hyperventilated prose.

"Oh! Oh! Frankie," he began, mimicking the girls' ululations. "The line in 
front of the Paramount theatre on Broadway starts forming at midnight. By four 
in the morning, there are over 500 girls … they wear bobby sox (of course), bow 
ties (the same as Frankie wears) and have photos of Sinatra pinned to their 
dresses …

"Then the great moment arrived. Sinatra appeared on stage ... hysterical 
shouts of 'Frankie ... Frankie'; you've heard the squeals on the radio when he 
sings. Multiply that by about a thousand times and you get an idea of the 
deafening noise."

For Weegee, this was another example of the human extremities that he 
documented with his instinct for the climatic moments in New York life: what he 
didn't mention was the fact that, after each performance, the Paramount was 
drenched in urine.

Like Rudolph Valentino's funeral in 1926, or The Wizard of Oz opening in 1939, 
the Columbus Day riot was a generation-defining media event acted out on 
Manhattan's streets: during the day some 30,000 frenzied bobby-soxers swarmed 
over Times Square in an exhilarated display of girl power.

The New Republic editor Bruce Bliven called it "a phenomenon of mass hysteria 
that is only seen two or three times in a century. You need to go back not 
merely to Lindbergh [Charles Lindbergh's first flight] and Valentino to 
understand it, but to the dance madness that overtook some German villages in 
the middle ages, or to the Children's Crusade." What was new was the power that 
one singer held, heralded by mass screaming, and the advent of the teenager as 
a social ideal. Sinatra was the first modern pop star.

Sinatra's fame had been steadily building. His breakthrough came in his first 
Paramount season in December 1942, when the theatre erupted with "five thousand 
kids stamping, yelling, screaming, applauding". These scenes only intensified 
during his return in May 1943. The mania overtook the hype: his press agents 
remembered hiring "girls to scream when he sexily rolled a note. But we needn't 
have. The dozen girls we hired to scream and swoon did exactly as we told 
them. But hundreds more we didn't hire screamed even louder. It was wild, 
crazy, completely out of control."

Although nearly 29 by October 1944, Sinatra was slightly built, nervous and 
youthful: "It was the war years," he later said, "there was a great loneliness. 
I was the boy in every corner drugstore, the boy who had gone to war."

In concert, he seduced his young audience. His bright blue eyes raked the 
crowd, singling out individuals so that he appeared to be singing for them 
alone, just one in a crowd of thousands. Matched to the ethereal kitsch of slow 
ballads such as Embraceable You, "The Voice" – as Sinatra was known – cast a 
spell that suspended time.

Sinatra's rise was unstoppable, for he filled a deep need. Bliven thought that 
the bobby-soxers at the Paramount "found in him, for all his youthfulness, 
something of a father image. And beyond that, he represents a dream of what 
they themselves might conceivably do or become."

In the mid-40s, Sinatra became a national figure of controversy and criticism. 
He was blamed for making young people lose "control of their emotions", and was 
attacked for being out of uniform: because of an injury, he had been ruled 
unfit for duty in 1943.

Yet his status was confirmed in September 1944 when he went to the White House 
and met the president. Franklin Roosevelt had already made public statements 
linking American politics with its popular music, but this meeting was a 
shrewdly taken opportunity to reaffirm that adolescents were a vital part of 
American society.

The Columbus Day riots coincided with the invention of the teenage market. In 
September 1944, the magazine Seventeen was launched, which declared to its 
primarily female readers: "you are the bosses of the business". It was an 
immediate success, selling half a million copies. Seventeen offered a 
non-patronising approach that struck a chord, and it focused Americans on the 
barely recognised purchasing power of adolescents: estimated at $750m (£465m).

The hysteria that surrounded Sinatra in October 1944 came at a crux time in 
the history of America and its youth. It reaffirmed the collective power of 
young women, and how they have always been central to pop.
 