
In February 2015, Avijit Roy and his wife, Rafida Bonya Ahmed, travelled from 
their home in Atlanta, Georgia, to Dhaka, the capitalBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>. This was their home town, and 
they were attending the annual Ekushey book fair, which runs all month. They 
had been unable to attend in 2014 because Roy had received death threats after 
the publication of his book The Virus of Faith, which criticised religion.

The couple were familiar with controversy. They ran a Bengali-language web 
forum calledMukto-Mona <https://mukto-mona.com>, or Free Minds, promoting 
rationalist thought, and had been threatened by Islamic fundamentalists. During 
their trip to Dhaka, they avoided being out late at night, varied their 
routines and checked in regularly with relatives. For the first 10 days, the 
strategy seemed to work.

On 26 February, they attended a series of events at the University of Dhaka, 
where the book fair is held. They left in the evening, walking back to their 
car through a crowded and well-lit area. Suddenly, they were surrounded by a 
group of masked men with machetes. Ahmed doesn’t remember what happened next, 
as the knives rained down upon them. There were hundreds of people around, 
including police officers. They did not step in. After the attack, a young 
journalist intervened and drove them to the hospital. Ahmed survived, severely 
injured.It was too late for Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/american-atheist-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
, who died during the drive.

“We knew the risks,” Ahmed told me when we met in central London four months 
after the attack. She is a small woman in her 40s with short, cropped hair, 
wide eyes and a youthful face. Because of the attack, she is missing a thumb. 
“Avi was there on his own in 2012, and he was pretty open and nothing happened, 
so we were not ready for this. Our daughter” – a student – “says we 
underestimated the situation. We thought, OK, there could be protests, there 
could be people yelling and screaming – but not this.” She pauses, struggling 
with herself. “We knew, we knew how dangerous it could be.”

Ahmed’s scalp and neck also bear scars; she was stabbed repeatedly in the 
head. She is quick to laugh, but says her thoughts are “scattered” by the heavy 
medication. She gets tired quickly because of the head injuries.
 Rafida Ahmed with her husband Dr Avijit Roy. They were attacked by masked men 
with machetes after attending an event at the University of Dhaka in February. 
Roy died shortly afterwards. 
Roy, who held dual US and Bangladeshi nationality, was the most prominent 
atheist writer to be attacked in Bangladesh, but he was not the first – or the 
last. On 30 March, a month after Roy’s murder, another blogger, Washiqur Rahman 
Babu,was set upon by a group of masked assailants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/blogger-hacked-death-bangladesh-dhaka>
. On 12 May, Ananta Bijoy Das, who wrote for Mukto-Mona on rationalism and 
science,was attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/third-atheist-blogger-killed-in-bangladesh-after-knife-attack>
 in his hometown of Sylhet. On 7 August, men with machetes broke into the Dhaka 
home ofNiloy Chakrabarti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/machete-gang-kills-secular-bangladeshi-blogger-niloy-chakrabarti>
, a blogger who used the pen name Niloy Neel. All three men died.

The four murders in 2015 were brutal and happened in quick succession, 
prompting police action.Three people have been arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/briton-touhidur-rahman-arrested-in-bangladesh-over-murders-of-secular-bloggers>
 – including a British citizen, Touhidur Rahman – over the deaths of Avijit Roy 
and Ananta Bijoy Das. But the violence goes back further. It began on 15 
January 2013, when atheist blogger and political activistAsif Mohiuddin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asif_Mohiuddin> was on his way to work and was 
attacked from behind by a group of men with machetes. “I [thought] I would 
die,” he tells me over Skype from his new home in Germany. “But somehow I 
survived.” He spent weeks in intensive care, and still finds it difficult to 
move his neck. “I think I will carry this problem all my life.”

Avijit Roy, the blogger who wouldn't back down in the face of threats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/avijit-roy-islamist-threats-before-death-dhaka-machetes-shafiur-rahman-farabi>
A month later, another blogger critical of Islamic fundamentalism, Ahmed Rajib 
Haider, was attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/feb/25/journalist-safety-bangladesh>
 in the same way outside his house in Dhaka. He did not survive. In August 
2014, someone broke into the Dhaka home of TV personality Nurul Islam Faruqi, 
who had criticised fundamentalist groups on air, and slit his throat. A 
humanist academic, Professor Shafiul Islam, who had pushed for a ban on 
full-face veils for students, was murdered near Rajshahi University in west 
Bangladesh in November.

These brutal crimes have gone unpunished; arrests have not led to 
prosecutions. The government appears unwilling, or unable, to stand with 
atheists. Instead, in an attempt to appease Islamists, it has ramped up its own 
actions against “blasphemous” bloggers. Secularists are terrified. Many have 
stopped writing altogether, some have left the country and others are 
desperately seeking an exit. Who is behind these attacks on atheists, a tiny 
subset of the Muslim-majority population? And can Bangladesh’s secular 
tradition survive in the face of such violence?

Bangladesh was born <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-12651483> out 
of the partition of India in 1947, when it was labelled East Pakistan, 
officially part of the new homeland for the Muslims of the subcontinent. The 
independence movement began in the 1950s, and came to a head with the bloody 
1971 war of independence, which saw genocide of liberation forces by West 
Pakistan. The war brought to the forefront tensions within Bangladesh. On one 
side were Islamists, who supported West Pakistan, arguing that it was an 
affront to Islam for Bangladesh to declare independence. On the other were 
secularists who wanted a state free of the religious strictures and economic 
marginalisation they suffered as part of Pakistan. The latter group won the 
battle of ideas, and the country’s constitution guaranteed secularism as a 
founding principle.

It didn’t last. Power was seized by the military in 1975 and, as had happened 
in Pakistan, a process of Islamisation began. In 1977, military leaders removed 
secularism from the constitution and declared Islam the state religion. This 
remained the case until 2010, when the supreme court restored the principle of 
secularism.Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> remained the state 
religion. This fractious history points to an unresolved question: what is the 
true identity of Bangladesh? Perhaps unsurprisingly for a debate born out of 
such violence, it is a polarising subject.
 ‘The government was officially ­recognising the fundamentalist message’ … 
Asif Mohiuddin was attacked by men with machetes in 2013. He survived and then 
was imprisoned twice. He now lives in Germany. 
“There is a rationalist intellectual tradition that goes back to the 19th 
century,” says Dr Sumit Ganguly, professor of Indian Civilisations at Indiana 
University. “There was already a cultural consensus about an openness to the 
world, a certain cosmopolitanism, reflected in the work of prominent writers.” 
But, he explains, this secular tradition did not exist in isolation. “There was 
always a strain of bigotry, of closed-mindedness – Hindus and Muslims were 
contemptuous of each other. During Bangladesh’s earlier heritage as East 
Pakistan, various forms of bigotry were actively promoted by the state.”

During the years, that conservative segment of the population has been 
empowered by periods of religious-minded military rule. One of the two main 
parties, the Bangladesh National Party (BNP), is allied with religious groups. 
The other, the Awami League, is secular. But, as religion has become an ever 
more sensitive topic, they too have capitulated to the religious lobby.

It was against this backdrop that a small but committed community of 
secularist bloggers began to emerge in the mid-2000s. The first 
Bengali-language public blogging platform,somewhereinblog.net 
<http://www.somewhereinblog.net/>, was launched in 2005. But gradually, some 
noticed an increasing volume of religious material.

“Day by day, I saw the Islamisation of blogs,” says Mohiuddin. “In Bangladesh, 
Islamic groups control the mainstream media and TV channels – and they were 
trying to control the blogs as well.” He and other writers started their own 
sites, contributing to each other’s blogs and starting Facebook discussions on 
history, philosophy, science, law and feminism. Some posts were explicitly 
critical of the government; others dealt with religious texts. “I criticised 
many verses of the Qur’an and the Bible because I thought those verses were not 
compatible with modern society,” says Mohiuddin.
 Humanist academic Professor Shafiul Islam, who had pushed for a ban on 
full-face veils for students, was murdered near Rajshahi University in west 
Bangladesh in November last year. 
It was through this virtual group of Bangladeshi atheists that Roy and Ahmed 
first made contact. They began to speak on the phone, discussing their ideas, 
how they both came to atheism. His background was Hindu, hers Muslim; he had 
abandoned faith at 19, she had at 13. Both came from liberal families who 
accepted their non-belief. On the phone, she teased him that he’d discovered 
atheism so late. They debated ideas and swapped stories about their family 
lives. They soon met and became a couple. “That marriage was a lot of work,” 
she says. “We grew and changed all the time and we didn’t agree on everything – 
but we were committed.”

When they first met in 2001, Roy had recently established Mukto-Mona as a 
small Yahoo forum. In 2002, Ahmed helped him set up the first Mukto-Mona 
website. Mukto-Mona became one of the central points for Bangladesh’s small 
community of atheist writers. They grew close; Ahmed describes Bijoy Das, 
murdered three months after her husband, as “a little brother”. She had 
recently come out of the intensive care unit when she heard about his death. 
“Every time I went to Bangladesh, I would give him the bus fare to go home, 
because he was a student,” she says. “I just lost my whole recovery when I 
heard about him.”

The scars of the 1971 war of independence have recently been reopened, drawing 
to the surface the tension between Islamists and secularists. In 2010, the 
Awami League began a war crimes tribunal aimed at bringing the perpetrators of 
mass killings to justice. From the outset, it was controversial. Critics saw it 
as political score-settling by Sheikh Hasina, prime minister and head of the 
Awami League, for the slaughter of her father in the military coup of 1975.

Many bloggers were vocal supporters of the tribunal. The trial came to a head 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21568349-week-chairman-bangladeshs-international-crimes-tribunal-resigned-we-explain>
 in late 2012 and early 2013, and it was at this point that fundamentalists 
turned their attention to atheist writers.

In January 2013 Mohiuddin was knifed, and in February Haider was killed. Both 
were active inthe Shahbag protest movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/13/shahbag-protest-bangladesh-quader-mollah>
, comprised of secularists supportive of the war crimes tribunal. After the 
attacks, thousands took to the streets, calling for justice for Mohiuddin and 
Haider. “This is where the tension [reached] a new level,” says Sumit Galhotra, 
Asia researcher for theCommittee to Protect Journalists 
<https://cpj.org/asia/bangladesh>. “But Bangladesh was already on this 
trajectory. Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, there were authors who had to 
flee the country, long before the current crisis.”
 Ahmed Rajib Haider, a blogger critical of Islamic fundamentalism, was 
attacked and killed outside his home in Dhaka in early 2013. 
It did not take long for Islamists to form counter-protests, calling for the 
death penalty for blasphemers and atheists. Protests descended into violent 
clashes. Islamist fundamentalists published a hit-list of 84 bloggers. Many had 
used pseudonyms; now they were outed. Newspapers ran inflammatory articles 
about non-believers. Many went into hiding, fearful of vigilante attack. 
Mohiuddin took to covering his face with a mask when he left the house.

The group leading the counter-protests, Hefazat-e-Islam, issued a 13-point 
list of demands. Among other hardline demands apparently inspired by the 
Taliban, it called for punishment for the leaders of the Shahbag movement. 
Rather than defending the right to freedom of expression, Hasina capitulated. 
In April 2013, four bloggers from the list distributed by Islamists were 
arrested. One of them was Mohiuddin, who had been attacked with machetes three 
months earlier.

“I was very angry when the government started arresting secular bloggers,” he 
says. “They were officially recognising the fundamentalist message – these 
people are atheists and they have to be killed. We had problems now from 
Islamic groups and the so-called secular Awami League.”

Prison was a dangerous place for Mohiuddin. His name and photograph had been 
in newspapers, and Islamist groups had incorrectly labelled him the leader of 
the country’s secular bloggers. “The first day I was in prison, all the 
prisoners shouted that in the morning they will cut me into pieces. I thought, 
this is the end of my life, and tomorrow morning they are going to kill me.” At 
one point, he was placed in a cell with two of the men who had attacked him. 
They were unrepentant.

Mohiuddin was in jail for three months, accused of criticising Islam and the 
prophet. He was bailed for a month before being imprisoned again for nine days. 
After that, he went to Germany to take up a scholarship. He plans to remain in 
Europe for several years, until it is safe for him to return home. “They are 
still looking for me. Just a few days ago I got threats. It has become very 
normal for me, but I still have to take care. I don’t share my location 
anywhere.”

Bangladesh blogger killed by machete gang had asked for police protection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/machete-gang-kills-secular-bangladeshi-blogger-niloy-chakrabarti>
Mohiuddin’s ordeal neatly crystallises the double threat faced by bloggers – 
Islamist violence on the one hand, and official repression on the other. The 
crisis faced by atheist writers is unfolding against a backdrop of a wider 
clampdown on press freedom. “It’s been a really bad time for the media,” says 
Galhotra. “Sheikh Hasina’s government has been going after anyone reporting 
critically on her.” The editor of Amardesh, an opposition newspaper,is behind 
bars <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-22110132>, while two TV news 
channels affiliated with the opposition remain off-air. Some Islamist bloggers 
have been arrested.

While tension about the war crimes tribunal has now died down, violence 
against atheist writers has surged. “One of the reasons is that Bangladesh has 
allowed a culture of impunity to flourish over the years,” says Galhotra. 
Arrests have been made after the four murders this year, but given that those 
charged with Haider’s killing in 2013 have still not stood trial, relatives are 
not hopeful. The attack on Roy and Ahmed this year gained international 
attention, but the Bangladeshi government made no comment. Eventually, in May,
Hasina’s son, Sajeeb Wazed, spoke to Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/11/us-usa-bangladesh-assassination-exclusiv-idUSKBN0NW04S20150511>
: “Our mother offered private condolences to Avijit’s father. But the political 
situation in Bangladesh is too volatile for her to comment further … given that 
our opposition party plays that religion card against us relentlessly, we can’t 
come out strongly for him. It’s about perception, not about reality.”

The impact on Bangladesh’s close-knit group of secularist bloggers has been 
drastic. Many have stopped writing. Mohiuddin bears the scars of this battle of 
ideas on his body; when he wakes up each morning, he has to stay still for 20 
minutes before he can move his neck. But he is most distressed by the loss of 
his work. When the government banned his blog, they deleted all its content 
from the server. “I cannot live my life without writing. I am breathing, so I 
have to write. I was very upset for that blog. I have to start everything from 
the beginning.”

Ahmed speaks about her husband in the present tense, and is grieving her loss. 
“It’s a process. I am still under treatment. It’s going to take a while. I feel 
nothing any more, absolutely nothing.”

Throughout their relationship, the couple gave each other handwritten letters. 
Ahmed’s last letter to Roy was written on 12 February, two weeks before he 
died. In it, she remembered that, when they first met, she criticised him for 
neglecting books because he was too focused on the internet. “I wrote to him 
and said, ‘Now you read so much more, and I have slowed down. You encourage me 
and remind me that I need to get back to that. I guess that’s the strength we 
have, that we encourage each other.’”

Her phone bleeped with messages from Mukto-Mona’s international network of 
moderators, determined to keep the discussion going. But the public space for 
Bangladesh’s atheist writers and activists is closing all the time.

A longer version of this piece appears in the Autumn 2015 edition of New 
Humanist magazine. Seenewhumanist.org.uk <https://newhumanist.org.uk/>
 