
Watch last night's episode on iPlayer here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/jul/22/desperate-romantics>
.

What larks, Dante, what larks! Hour two and mutiny barged into the 
pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood's (PRB) art-party, grumbling about the rain and 
demanding a cocktail umbrella for its laudanum and cranberry.

While last week's events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jul/22/desperate-romantics-coast> 
hinted at an undercurrent of tension bubbling beneath all the high-fives and yo 
bro'-ing, this was where it all began to go wrong. The cause? Lizzie Siddal: 
Royal Academy-approved stunner, communal model/sitter and probable user of 
Clairol Nice 'n Easy in Consumptive Victorian Muse. Dante Gabriel Rossetti was 
so smitten he started to call her Sid. Yes, Sid. As in James. Or Little. 
Clearly, here was a Romance for the Ages.

"Oh, Sid, Sid, Sid," he mooned, the camera zooming in on his authentically 
honking 19th century fingers, as they rubbed listlessly at something hopeless 
in charcoal.

What with Dante and John Millais squabbling among themselves, William "Maniac" 
Hunt had little to do but look world-weary in the shadows, shaking his head and 
going "mnyeh" whenever a PRB punch-up appeared imminent.

In an effort to redress the balance, he briefly had guilty sex on a piano with 
muse/strumpet Annie, his eyebrows forming a tortured W, while her uneducated 
buttocks slapped out a rudimentary approximation of Chopsticks. "I want to buy 
you manners," he told her later, sotto voce, as if he was talking about tights 
or something. This was his way of asking her out. Which was nice. Not least 
because he'd spent most of the evening telling the Royal Academy what a 
miserable tart she was. Annie/Eliza Doolittle gurgled bewilderedly by way of 
response, thus setting the scene for in-no-way-sexist future scenes in which 
Hunt teaches her the alphabet, naked, on all fours, behind an unusually large 
euphonium.

Lizzie/Sid had also experienced an epiphany. Having survived a near-drowning 
in Millais's bathtub, her emotional corset had come undone. "There's no going 
back!" she cooed as Rossetti read her a "sexy" poem. Duly untethered, they 
banged frenziedly as the stanzas flew.

Elsewhere, Mrs Ruskin discovered her husband's stash of pornographic sketches. 
Quietly furious, the asexual ninny offered her up as a model to Millais, whose 
left eyebrow hovered saucily. Mrs Ruskin stared at his bow-tie and did a sex 
face. Her husband scratched his chin and wondered what to have for supper. The 
end.

Repressed nipple count: Three (two rising slowly from a bathtub and one 
trembling in terror prior to the aforementioned couplet-based coupling).

Symbolic hat watch: Dante spent most of the episode in a state of wanton, 
hair-tossing hatlessness (subtext: he has an erection). Fred's stovepipe/bowler 
contraption, meanwhile, has grown in relation to his standing in the PRB. Last 
week, it was an unassuming five-incher. Here, it teetered like a jug of tar 
balanced on a tennis ball. Evidently, any more of this "doing favours for 
narcissistic painters" nonsense and he'll be wearing a silo, come Michaelmas.
 