
So what exactly is a gizzard? My band-mates want to know what's in salade de 
gésiers, other than leaves and dressing. It's a fleshy pouch in which birds 
mash up seeds with bits of grit before digesting them, I say. I'm not making 
this sound like much of a delicacy.

Honestly, they are very tender, like the oysters from the underside of a 
chicken - you know, the bit Henry the Eighth would eat before discarding the 
rest of the bird. Ordering salade niçoise, they nod encouragingly; the way my 
former colleagues did when, at the age of 30, I said I was leaving my job as a 
lecturer to sing in a pop group. I don't mind. I'm a gastro-adventurer.

We are sitting outside at a rickety cafe table. Sunglasses and scarves are à 
la mode with diners on this bright November day. We are by the sprawling 
Parisian flea market in Clignancourt. Stalls selling counterfeit Sean Paul and 
G-Unit clothes seem somehow magical. It is because of the scent of roasting 
chestnuts that hangs in the air. There are few foods left that are truly 
seasonal and fewer that enhance a sense of season more than chestnuts on a 
brazier. As you crack the blackened shell to raid the hot fluffy sweetness 
inside, squirts of primal saliva fill your hunter-gatherer's mouth.

This is a predominantly Arab area. Behind the glass of a rotisserie over the 
road, 30 chickens drip their richness on to golden potatoes in a tray. The 
birds waiting to be roasted boast two proud rosettes, reading "Volaille 
Normande Contrôlée" and "Sôciété Française de Contrôle de Viande Halal". This 
relationship seems eerily symbiotic after nine nights of rioting.

As we wait for our food, a mangy pigeon with a gnarled red stump picks the 
dried gristle from a chicken bone that must have been in the gutter since last 
night. I steel my stomach. Nothing is going to spoil my lunch: I'm a 
gastro-adventurer. Bored, the pigeon flaps off into the path of a Vespa and 
tumbles to the ground, winged. We gasp collectively. It looks at us with a 
dazed "What did I do wrong?" expression, staggers towards us and under the 
wheel of a Renault.

There is a simultaneous crunch and pop, like a kid jumping on an empty juice 
carton. It's gone - replaced by a flat mess of bones, guts and feathers. The 
gastro-adventurer shudders. His gésiers arrive, nestling deep rare pink between 
frilly leaves.

· The writer is the lead singer of Franz Ferdinand. This column appears weekly 
as the band travel the globe.
 