
To understand the impact of Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 1978 on a seven-year-old 
boy from a small island in Greece, you have to clear your mind of a lot of 
developments.

Back then, Greece was four years out of a dictatorship and not yet a member of 
the European Community, travel abroad was expensive and uncommon, information 
was sought in the pages of bulky home encyclopaedias and important moments were 
captured with a Kodak Pocket Instamatic. Back then, a holiday road trip through 
Italy and France in a red Simca that broke down every time Dad drove too fast 
over a puddle was an impossible folly.

The giant ferry that would take us from the western port of Patras to Bari in 
Italy was wonder enough. A cabin with bunk beds and perfectly round windows; 
half a dozen lounges as vast as schoolyards; cafeteria glass displays full of 
strange and exotic puddings with names like “tiramisu”; fruit machines bleeping 
their siren song at my father’s gambling addiction.

There is no line in the sea to mark a border. It is a fiction invented by 
possessive politicians and complicit cartographers. Yet a fictional line was 
crossed and, as we disembarked, everything was exactly the same and entirely 
different. I opened my eyes and ears and took it all in. So, this was ... 
Italy. People spoke a melodious language I did not understand. Transactions 
took place in a currency called “lira” and involved millions. The signs were in 
a different alphabet. And everyone kept wishing us “Auguri! Auguri!” Which 
baffled me quite a bit, since in Greek it means “Cucumber! Cucumber!”

The same trick was repeated a week later when we drove through the Mont Blanc 
tunnel – “the longest and deepest you can drive through in the world”, Dad 
informed the three of us in the back. It was then; it isn’t now. We entered the 
tunnel in the valley of Aosta and exited in Chamonix. And just like that, we 
were in France! Yet another language, a different cuisine, a strange new 
currency – French franc notes, so thin you could see through them and so large 
you had to fold them twice to fit in a wallet.

For Dad, the cinephile, the trip was a beguiling tour of favourite film sets: 
over there,Anita Ekberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/24/anita-ekberg-screen-legends-french>
 danced in the fountain; on those steps, Gregory Peck pretended to run into 
Audrey Hepburn; behind that palazzo, Donald Sutherland caught a glimpse of his 
daughter’s ghost; and right here is whereCary Grant kissed Grace Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/aug/07/why-to-catch-a-thief-is-the-one-film-you-should-watch-this-week-video>
. “You’ve a very strong grip. The kind a burglar needs.”

For Mum, I suspect, it was an endless reprise of telling us not to bicker in 
the car, trying to read foreign signs and give directions and getting lost. 
There was the logistical nightmare of ensuring a plentiful supply of food and 
drink any time a hungry mouth opened. Most of all, the constant military 
campaign of making certain that three very curious children didn’t get lost. A 
journey filled with heart-stopping moments in which, for a breathless instant, 
one of us couldn’t be spotted. Then she would see us and blood would flow to 
her face again. “Hold my hand. Hold your father’s hand. Hold your sister’s 
hand.” We held hands a lot back then.

For my sisters and me it was the densest concentration of new information, 
stimuli and wonders we had ever experienced. For the family as a whole, it was 
the closest we have ever been as a unit. Something about an alien environment 
makes you huddle a little closer, hold the corner of your father’s coat a 
little tighter, ask questions with more intensity. Love your family that little 
bit more. We had each other exclusively and an entire continent to ourselves.

Memories, of course, are notoriously tricky things. I have no idea whether all 
of what I remember actually happened or whether I have amalgamated different 
journeys and different Christmases in my brain. What I do remember is the love.

Rome and Venice and Monte Carlo will continue to be brilliant, but not in the 
same way, because I will never be seven again. My family will never be together 
again. Different versions of it are, but not that one. Were the rebellious 
cells which would eventually mutate and attack my father’s pancreas present in 
him that Christmas? Was the genetic material that would eventually manifest as 
Alzheimer’s already working on my mother’s razor-sharp brain? It doesn’t 
matter. We may have wasted other fortnights, but not that one.

Two weeks of autostrade and motels, restaurants and museums, maps and 
arguments, zoos and dessert trolleys. An overnight stay in Avellino in a 
“pensione” with impossibly tall and soft beds, with a view ofMount Etna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/jun/16/europe-active-volcano-mount-etna-erupts-video>
, ice-cream outside the Colosseum in Rome on an unseasonably warm day, seeing a 
great white shark for the first time in Monaco’s Musée Océanographique on 
Christmas Day, hearing thousands of bottles smash on the stroke of midnight in
Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/17/venice-enrica-rocca-italy>, 
thrown off the “ponti”, as we welcomed 1979 from a balcony of the Hotel Rialto.

Something changed inside me during those holidays; something profound. Once a 
child has begun to explore a world beyond their nation, the exploration never 
stops – it can’t. Once you have crossed one border, you begin to look at the 
whole world differently – as food to be tasted and language to be explored; 
customs to be understood and train schedules to be bent to your will; maps to 
be deciphered, summits to be conquered and marble monuments to be caressed.

I think that was the Christmas I felt, for the first time, that I belonged to 
a larger collective, separated by semantics. The first time I felt more than 
just me. Who knows whether without that journey I would have decided to study 
abroad and live and work in another country? Whether I would be spending so 
much of my time arguing with insular nationalists, scared of “the other”? 
Without “the other”, home does not exist. It lacks the fictional lines around 
it, which define it. Or if it exists, it is an airless place, vacuum-packed 
with mothballs.

To all seven-year-olds out there – of whatever actual age – I wish you the 
courage to embrace both the familial and the other. I wish you all the very 
best for this memory-making festive season. Or as the Italians say: Cucumber! 
Cucumber!
 