 This is not the column I had intended to write. Yesterday lunchtime I filed my 
copy as I always do, and went out. By the middle of the afternoon I was 
watching news of the American Airlines crash. A friend of mine had left 
Heathrow for JFK at 2pm. She had gone to set up an art installation - the Angel 
Project - as a part of a desire to begin the healing after the pain.
I came straight home and asked to rewrite my piece. One of the strangest 
things about these times is the need to respond quickly. I don't mean glibly, I 
mean to live in the moment, something usually so hard for any of us to do. To 
live now, here and now, without guards from the past or fears for the future. 
Now is all we have, all we can be sure of. Planes fall out of the sky.

For me, art is a way of living in the moment while remaining connected to the 
past. I want continuity, not islands of separation.

New York has become a city separated from its past by a date on a calendar. 
Before September 11 seems like an innocent lost paradise - for all its greed 
and struggle. Since then New York and, in a wider way America, feels separated 
from the rest of the world. Allies are other countries. The past is another 
country. America is alone.

Everybody I know out there says, "You don't know how it feels." Chelsea 
Clinton in Oxford only wants to be around others like her. I was irritated by 
her complaints about anti-American sentiment in this country, but I wonder if 
she is not just using a rational shorthand for irrational feelings? She is hurt 
and miserable - like most Americans - and any dissent, any hesitation on our 
part over US policy, reads like disloyalty or moral cowardice.

How can we heal the pain in America without piling it up elsewhere? 

Art is part of the answer - not as a panacea but because art has a way of 
going into the hurt place and cleaning it. Some wounds never heal but they need 
not remain infected.

There are movements in New York now to put on street theatre and installations 
as a way of re-connecting people to what they were before September 11 and what 
they might become because of it having happened. These are the worst of times 
and the best of times. These are moments of possibility and change. In such 
moments, art is not pointless or helpless, it is a human energy directed 
towards good.

When I read that the great and the good of Hollywood had been summoned to a 
Beverly Hills meeting at the weekend, to help the Bush administration get the 
message across, I was depressed and angry. Hollywood cannot be turned into a 
propaganda machine - or rather it can, in that chilling cold war way that the 
50s were about. Will we soon be back with a blacklist of dissenters and a new 
House UnAmerican Activities Commitee?

Art - real art, and Hollywood can do that too - is not in the pay of 
governments or regimes. Its freedom is its strength. I would like to see some 
of that pile of cash that Hollywood will be spending "showing the heroism of 
American soldiers" thrown into community projects, into neighbourhood 
installations and exhibitions. I would like to throw open the doors of every 
theatre and opera house and cinema and make it all free and show the best there 
is - of past and present - and make a future by commissioning new work.

It is not ineffectual game-playing, it is a way of re-energising people who 
have been hit hard by bewilderment and despair. To understand our lives, and to 
keep them in context, not unmoored into lonely seas, we need wisdom, and truth. 
The media machine cannot offer wisdom and truth. Some will find it in religion, 
but religion is part of the problem in this crisis. Art can be the creative 
open space that gives us room to rebuild where there is no steel and glass - 
the space in our hearts.

Whatever the truth of what caused the plane to come down yesterday, it means 
more pain for a city breathing pain in every atom of dust. We feel for the 
people of New York because they are us - we could have been there, in some 
sense we were there. What is happening in the world now is happening to all of 
us. There can be no separation. The planet is too small and we are too many. 
Science has shrunk the world to a crystal ball where everything can be seen - 
except the future. If there is a future, we will have to go there together.
 