
On a summer night in July 2008, Commander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> decided to take a break from his 
duties as a senior police officer and fighting his own force over race – a 
combination he had become used to juggling since joining the Metropolitan 
police in 2001.

Dizaei and his wife, Shy, went to Yas, a Persian restaurant in west London run 
by an old friend of his.

Dizaei could have had no inkling that, within hours of finishing his meal, a 
series of bizarre events would unfold, taking him into the dock of Southwark 
crown court and making him the most senior police officer in modern times to 
face criminal charges.

The 47-year-old Scotland Yard commander and his wife left the restaurant and 
went to their car, where they sat talking to the restaurant owner, Sohrab 
Eshragi, through an open window.

During their conversation, 24-year-old Waad al-Baghdadi, a website designer, 
crossed their path.

There was no dispute that a row broke out, but it was for the jury to decide 
what was said by whom, whether the police officer used his position to bully 
Baghdadi or whether the web designer had threatened Dizaei and his wife.

The criminal case against Dizaei boiled down to one question – whether the 
jury believed the word of a senior police officer or that of the man he 
arrested.

The crown's case was presented by one of Britain's top criminal prosecutors, 
Peter Wright QC, who had led the cases against the Suffolk serial killer of sex 
workers, and terrorists who plotted to set off liquid bombs on board planes 
heading to North America from Britain.

Wright told the jury Dizaei had engaged in "wholesale abuse" of his powers by 
bullying, threatening and intimidating a man in the culmination of a personal 
vendetta.

He said Dizaei had falsely arrested Baghdadi, claiming he had threatened him 
and stabbed him with the end of a shisha pipe during a scuffle.

Furthermore, Wright said a medical examiner called in by police concluded that 
the injuries suffered by the officer were more likely to have been 
self-inflicted.

Dizaei was charged with threatening and falsely arresting Baghdadi, who 
claimed the Met commander had failed to pay £600 for a website he had designed 
for him.

The policeman detained Baghdadi, called 999 for help and maintained his 
account, both at the scene and after Baghdadi was in custody, by making verbal 
and written statements.

He said the officer's account was contradicted by a 999 call Baghdadi made, 
during which Dizaei arrested him.

The crown said its case was supported by CCTV footage and other evidence, and 
Wright told the jury: "These are allegations, we say, that involve the 
wholesale abuse of power by a senior police officer for entirely personal and 
oblique motives."

In the witness box, Baghdadi claimed that, when he came across Dizaei and his 
wife, he talked normally. But he said the officer had become enraged, left the 
car and squared up to him on the pavement.

He told the jury Dizaei had challenged him to a fight and then ordered him to 
leave the restaurant after he had gone in for a meal.

Baghdadi said he had left but then called 999 before staying in the area.

Then Dizaei drove up and proceeded to arrest Baghdadi, during which time he 
was alleged to have told him: "I'll fuck your life."

CCTV footage of the scene showed parts of the incident but, in the absence of 
eyewitnesses, the only direct evidence that Dizaei had made any threats came 
from Baghdadi.

The web designer told the jury he saw Dizaei as a gangster "like Tony 
Montana", the mob boss from the film Scarface.

Set against this was evidence from the officer's wife that Baghdadi's verbal 
tirade had left her terrified and that he had said he would "extract the money 
out of your throat".

The restaurant owner told the jury Baghdadi was "a crook basically", adding: 
"His history ... everybody knows he's not a good gentleman."

Eshragi said that, far from Dizaei intimidating Baghdadi by ordering him out 
of the restaurant, he had urged him to ask the web designer to leave because he 
feared a fight might break out.

"I was worried about this man [Baghdadi]. He was in a fight before and 
disappeared before the police arrived," Eshragi said.

The crown's claim that Dizaei had wounded himself, for which it relied on a 
police doctor, was challenged by Dr Nat Cary, one of the country's leading 
forensic pathologists who has worked on many high-profile cases including the 
death of Benazir Bhutto and the case of Ian Tomlinson, the newspaper seller who 
died at last year's G20 protest.

Cary said the claim was based on a "fundamentally flawed approach" to forensic 
medicine.

"He [Dizaei] alleges he has been poked with the shisha pipe," he said. "In my 
view, that's consistent [with the injuries]."
 