
I've just written a new opera that premiered at the Met in New York. The 
beauty of that slightly outrageous statement is that it is not entirely untrue. 
OK, nothing about my new opera is really new. On the contrary, much of the 
music is over 300 years old. The characters are even older. The story is 
fashioned from the most familiar of components. And yet all those notes and all 
those words in that order, have never been heard before on any stage. So, on a 
technicality, I'll stand by my opening statement.

Let me explain. This all began about five years ago. Peter Gelb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/dec/08/opera-big-screen-peter-gelb>, 
who had not long taken over at the Met, came to me with a rather bizarre 
notion. "How would it be," he asked, "if you took hidden gems from the baroque 
period and turned them into an opera? Oh, and it has to be in English." That 
was the totality of the brief. To showcase wonderful music that is rarely heard 
on any opera stage. That was the genesis, and like the best of them it 
culminated in revelations.

And so I started listening. For over a year, using iTunes and YouTube (the 
latter an amazing classical music resource – who knew?), I listened to nothing 
but baroque vocal music. When I say listened, in fact I used the same technique 
that I deploy in art galleries: the pieces that tap you on the shoulder and 
demand to be listened to (or looked at) were my first port of call. Music that 
stopped me in my tracks went on a "must include" list that eventually had well 
over 24 hours of music.

Handel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/george-frideric-handel> came first. 
His Italian operas, over 40 of them, and the oratorios, every bit as 
theatrical, sometimes more so. The humanist bible that is L'Allegro, il 
Moderato, ed il Penseroso. The church music: I allowed myself one ridiculously 
famous example, since the entrance music for the World's Greatest Living Tenor (
Placido Domingo <https://www.theguardian.com/music/placido-domingo>) seemed to 
demand it. And most revelatory, the young Handel of the early Italian cantatas, 
of masterpieces such as The Triumph of Time and The Resurrection, where we see 
a fully-formed genius spreading his wings. I listened to everything and, as 
George Bernard Shaw said of hearing late Beethoven, I did with my ears what I 
do with my eyes when they stare.

Next came Vivaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2010/mar/04/vivaldi-google-doodle>
 who, thanks to some remarkable recent recordings, is now slap-bang on the 
operatic map. His "hidden gems" are often pretty expertly concealed. But when 
you come across them, they grab and galvanise you. Vivaldi has a dark, brooding 
lyricism and above all a kinetic energy, a virile oomph, unrivalled by any of 
his contemporaries. He ended up with nine arias in my finished piece, but I 
could have chosen 20 more.

The other main strand was French baroque. If you think Handel is theatrical, 
these guys are off the scale. Not just Lully and Charpentier (neither of whom 
made the cut) but also the weird and wonderful Leclair (who did). The greatest 
of these, though, is Rameau. Rarely does old music sound so astonishingly 
modern. As eccentric as Berlioz, and as gifted in writing for dance as 
Tchaikovsky or Stravinsky, Rameau came to opera even later in his life than 
Janácek. I had decided to include a masque sequence (more precisely, a "dream 
ballet"). Its music is mostly by Rameau.

How, though, to make all these various musics 
<http://www.metoperafamily.org/metopera/news/enchanted-island-music.aspx?icamp=EnchIslint&iloc=prodpage>
 feel like one piece? The language was going to help. A new English translation 
of the works (simple, I hope, and not too flowery) would lend consistency. The 
orchestra would be useful, too: one band to bind the sound worlds. But it was 
clear that it would need a story, one that would lead to this music – to cause 
it, rather than be a symptom of it.

My thinking was that unfamiliar music needs a familiar story. An anti-Mamma 
Mia!, as it were. A jukebox full of flip sides. And the stories best known to 
me since my youth (thanks to a scholarly father) were those told by 
Shakespeare. It was listening to Purcell that first brought The Tempest to 
mind. Purcell and Dryden's version was called The Enchanted Island, a title too 
good to ignore for a piece to be premiered in Manhattan. Dryden, though, had 
spotted that a desert island would, by definition, be slightly low on love 
interest, and love is what fuels the aria-making machine that is baroque opera. 
Someone falls in love: love aria. Someone looks on: jealousy aria. Someone is 
deceived: rage aria.

Dryden's addition of Dorinda, a boy-mad sister to Miranda, wasn't too 
inspiring. But his fleshing out of the sorceress Sycorax (Caliban's mother and 
Ariel's previous owner) was too good not to steal. And it wasn't too much of a 
stretch to imagine Sycorax seduced, spurned and then banished by Prospero to 
the dark side of the island. He steals her land, her son, her servant, her 
heart – all handy motives for revenge, and for the revenge aria (we have a 
cracker in act one, originally from Handel's Teseo), not to mention 
reconciliation and the forgiveness aria (ditto in act two, from his Partenope).

Still, the lack of love interest remained. The aria machine was demanding more 
fuel. My second choice of Shakespeare play was A Midsummer Night's Dream, 
(again because of Purcell, and his Fairy Queen) with its four intertwining 
lovers. I thought: let's mash the two stories together and see where it takes 
us. Lysander and Demetrius are maybe accompanying their wives on a honeymoon 
cruise when they get caught up in Ariel's tempest. Why did he zap the wrong 
ship? Perhaps because Sycorax corrupted the spell. Maybe she then tries to 
ensure the future of her island by helping Helena fall for Caliban. Miranda 
could fall for Demetrius, Lysander and finally Ferdinand – proclaiming "Oh 
brave new world" to every one of them. Lest things get too complicated, I could 
hide Hermia in a cave until Act Two. And Prospero could perhaps be forgiven in 
a Figaro-style finale. It was sort of writing itself.

Meanwhile, the show had to be cast, and quickly. Thankfully, as soon as I 
thought of The Tempest, I was literally hearing voices. Prospero – numinous, 
shamanic – should be the counter tenor required in all baroque opera. Mercurial 
Ariel: coloratura soprano. Caliban: bass. Sycorax: a dramatic mezzo. Miranda: a 
young lyric soprano. The Met's wish list was remarkably congruent with my 
needs: David Daniels, Danielle De Niese, Luca Pisaroni, Joyce DiDonato and 
Lisette Oropesa were free and interested and I was starting to feel like a 
greedy kid in a sweetshop.

Then came Placido Domingo, whom Gelb had asked to join the project. Could I 
find a role for him? Could I? You had me at "Pla-". And so the role of Neptune 
was born. And very handy he proved, if only for plot purposes. A god (and 
Domingo has, amazingly, never played one) can always alter events and put 
wrongs to right. I like a character to go on a journey and Neptune is no 
exception. He starts depressed and irritable – his powers are waning, his 
oceans polluted – but rediscovers his mojo, as it were, and intervenes in the 
affairs of men. He brings Act One to its climax with an astonishing Handel 
scena from Tamerlano.

By now music and story were informing each other. A ravishing sleep aria from 
Vivaldi's Tito Manlio demanded to be featured, so I wrote a sleep scene. A rage 
aria from Handel's Hercules followed. Similarly, the performers, now cast, had 
music they wanted to sing; interestingly, Vivaldi was high on everyone's list. 
I was only too happy to bend the story to lead to their preferred arias. By 
this stage, I was contacting our baroque experts, William Christie and Ellen 
Rosand, and asking questions like: "Is there a fast trio for baritone tenor and 
soprano, in which the woman is impervious to male wooing?" Yes, in Handel's 
Susanna. "Is there a mixed quartet that might sound like two couples waking 
up?" Yes again, in Vivaldi's La Verità in Cimento. "Does anyone know a baroque 
sextet?" No, so I fashioned one out of an early Handel quartet.

On New Year's Eve, after numerous workshops, rewrites, tweaks and cuts, we 
opened at the Met. The production, by Phelim McDermott, is sumptuous, and the 
cast quite simply the finest in the world. As for the piece, well, many New 
Yorkers have taken it to their hearts. Purists have been suitably and 
predictably outraged. My only hope is that it should be seen for what it is: a 
showcase for, and a love letter to, a century of amazing music. 

The Enchanted Island screens live from the Met at 80 cinemas around the UK on 
21 January. Details:www.metopera.org/uk 
<http://www.metoperafamily.org/metopera/liveinhd/uk.aspx>

• Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2012/jan/11/the-enchanted-island-metropolitan-opera-pictures>
 for a gallery of images from the production
 