
The vultures have been circling gleefully. The abrupt collapse of Lehman 
Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> and this week's 
fast-moving banking crisis have generated unedifying smirks of mirth among the 
short-sighted, the ignorant and the dim-witted.

In the Guardian this week, the Pulp singer Jarvis Cocker opined  that it was 
"really nice seeing capitalism getting its comeuppance" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/17/recession.labour>. Over at 
the Daily Mail, Allison Pearsondeclared that her heart did not bleed 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1056789/ALLISON-PEARSON-Which--money-life.html>
 for "the Lehman's man whose idea of economising was to fire the dog-walker 
that escorts his poodle for a daily wee in Kensington Gardens".

Personally, I'm getting bored of arguing with ostensibly sensible friends who 
seem to think that it's good news when many of Lehman's 25,000 employees lose 
their jobs overnight. Thousands more are likely to go in Merrill Lynch's 
takeover by Bank of America, about 6,000 were laid off when Bear Stearns went 
belly up – and that's before you even consider Northern Rock, HBOS, Washington 
Mutual. The list goes on.

I'm no fan of top bankers' ridiculous salaries. It was utterly ludicrous for 
Goldman Sachs' Lloyd Blankfein to get $68.5m last year – the boards of top 
banks have proven themselves to be spineless in cracking down on this obscene 
phenomenon. Even Morgan Stanley's boss, John Mack, once admitted as such, 
telling an interviewer: "Let's whisper it, but the truth of the matter is that 
all of us are overpaid."

That doesn't apply, though, to the legions of cleaners, caterers, drivers, 
secretaries, mailroom workers and maintenance men who work at banks – or even 
to the massed ranks of middle-ranking salarymen who make a good living but 
aren't in stratospheric cocaine and caviar territory.

More importantly, critics are confusing banks' excesses with their underlying 
roles. Banks aren't inherently evil – they're not there to destroy mankind or 
to steal from anybody. They were invented to look after our money, to invest in 
businesses and to make our savings, pensions and insurance policies more 
valuable. Over the last few years, they've gone over the top by taking too many 
risks. That means they need to change. Their behaviour needs to be modified, 
probably by greater regulation. Their management needs a shake-up and their 
culture needs to become less aggressive. But it certainly doesn't mean it's 
good news when they go bust.

Perhaps I'm biased because I have a brother who worked at Bear Stearns – and 
because I've been talking to various Lehman employees this week. For most of 
them, redundancy doesn't mean economising on staff to walk their poodles. It 
means worrying about where they'll find the money for next month's mortgage 
payment.

A friend who works at Lehman in London described Monday as follows: "We 
arrived in the morning and we were told what had happened. Our line managers 
held brief meetings, they passed on the information they had. That, for me, was 
that all parts of the business relevant to us were in administration. That 
basically means it's all over and that we should basically clear out our desks. 
We started to disentangle our lives from Lehman. I was sorting out my emails, 
sending any relevant ones to a personal account ... there was no need and no 
desire to have us hanging around."

It's a fairly brutal end – and the immediate pre-occupation for Lehman staff 
in London was whether they would be getting their September pay cheques, due at 
the end of this week, in time for direct debits to pay personal bills. It looks 
as if they will – although it'll be the last month.

"It was surprisingly calm," says the Lehman's banker I spoke to. "There was a 
kind of blitz spirit, in the sense that we were all in it together. A lot of us 
have been working in areas that were doing fine - my group was making money. We 
don't feel personally responsible for what's happened."

It is perfectly natural that shipyard workers, miners, firefighters, teachers 
and nurses should engender more immediate public sympathy than those who do 
less visible jobs in comfortable offices. I'm not suggesting anybody should go 
on a march to support jobless bankers – it is an inherently insecure profession 
in which people are at the mercy of the markets.

But when bad things happen, anybody with an ounce of imagination ought to feel 
a degree of compassion for those affected and for their families, irrespective 
of political leanings. And as for Jarvis Cocker, who used to sing about the 
common people, how does he think Pulp sold all those records? Wasn't that mass 
marketing, aggressive promotion and capitalism?
 