
For sheer off-message bloody mindedness, there aren't many Wall Street titans 
who can beatKen Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ken-lewis>, the 
boss of Bank of America. He was at it again this week, defending his pay packet 
and his use of an executive jet.

The jet, he told the Financial Times <>, allowed him make five or six client 
visits on a typical trip from BoA's North Carolina headquarters to California. 
He isn't going to fly on it for personal holidays any more – although he 
described this sacrifice as "cosmetic" because he used to personally refund the 
cost.

Asked whether he'd follow Citigroup's Vikram Pandit by cutting his pay ($20m 
in 2007) to just $1, he chuckled and pointed out that Pandit was independently 
wealthy, having sold his hedge fund for $800m in 2007.

"I didn't get a nice bundle by selling my hedge fund to Bank of America. So 
we're a little different in that sense," said Lewis.

Lewis, 62, a Mississippi-born soldier's son, once confessed to the Wall Street 
Journal that he had a "chip on his shoulder", elaborating: "I had no Ivy League 
background, no blue-blood parents."

Lewis may well have made a spectacular miscalculation in buying Merrill Lynch 
last year, just as the brokerage plunged deep into the mire. But there is 
something perversely admirable about his refusal to stick to the script – he 
joked, slightly oddly, to a congressional committee recently that he felt like 
a "corporal of the universe" rather than a captain of the universe.

The unions are after his head – the CtW investment group, which represents a 
coalition of workers' groups, this week demanded his dismissal, describing it 
as a "prerequisite" in rebuilding BoA's credibility among shareholders, 
regulators and the public.

If he gets kicked out, his penchant for non sequiturs will be missed. After a 
slump in profits <> in 2007, he declared: "I've had all the fun I can stand in 
investment banking." A year later, he was negotiating to buy Merrill Lynch.

Obama's certain ratio

It's a bit weird to have the president of the United States dispensing 
investment advice. During his press conference with the prime minister, Gordon 
Brown, this week,Barack Obama declared <> that shrewd investors should pile 
back into the markets.

"What you're now seeing is profit and earning ratios are starting to get to 
the point where buying stocks is a potentially good deal, if you've got a 
long-term perspective on it," said Obama.

Not sure if this is really a smart idea – if the market falls a further 20%, 
his words could be used against him. But at least he appears to know what an 
earnings ratio is. Could George Bush have uttered the phrase convincingly?

Hope for homeowners

Good news for despairing homeowners looking for signs of hope in America's 
bombed-out property market. The Chinese are coming!

A group of 40 Chinese househunters travelled from Beijing last week to check 
out dirt-cheap homes in the US. They'll be scouring the ruins of once-booming 
markets in Los Angeles, Las Vegas, San Francisco, Boston and New York.

According to the People's Daily <>, the group are a "chosen 40" from more than 
400 applicants in a trip organised by an estate agency, Soufun.com. They all 
have more than 10m yuan (£1.04m) to their names, making them millionaires in 
Chinese and US terms. And they have practical considerations in mind – some are 
keen to buy residences for their children to use while studying abroad, even 
though those children may still be in nursery school.

As Timothy Geithner desperately hurls trillions of dollars around to stimulate 
the economy and rescue failing corporate behemoths, money from any quarter is 
more than welcome. Each of the visitors is paying about $3,600 for the trip.

"It's good for Chinese investors who see lots of opportunities," Andrew Hang 
Chen of co-organisers Fortune Group told the San Francisco Chronicle 
<http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2009/02/23/BUUE1631TP.DTL&type=business>
. "It's also good for the American economy, at least on a small scale."

It's perhaps the ultimate humiliation, however, for those Republicans in 
Congress who keep thundering on about how the US is in danger of turning 
towards of "socialism".
 