
“No English novelist ever suggested more unspeakable things, and got away 
without being understood, than me in that book,” wrote Arnold Bennett to a 
friend after The Old Wives’ Tale was published in 1908. The novel received 
almost universal critical acclaim – so much so that Bennett is alleged to have 
responded: “I don’t read my reviews, I measure them.” But appreciation for the 
book has been curiously muted ever since. It’s never been out of print, but 
it’s not exactly set the world alight, either.


I first read it out of homage to my Midlands industrial ancestry and expected 
an earnest exposition of the “it’s grim up north” mindset. I certainly didn’t 
expect scenes like this:


Her eye caught the guillotine again, and was held by it. Guarded by gendarmes, 
that tall and simple object did most menacingly dominate the square with its 
crude red columns. Tools and a large open box lay on the ground beside it. […] 
There was a clicking noise … She shrank down to the floor in terror and 
loathing, and hid her face, and shuddered. Shriek after shriek, from various 
windows, rang on her ears in a fusillade; and then the mad yell of the penned 
crowd, which, like herself, had not seen but heard, extinguished all other 
noise. Justice was done.

Quite how Bennett got away without being understood there is beyond me. Sophia 
Baines has by this point eloped to Paris with a travelling salesman, abandoning 
the stultifying prospect of a life spent assisting her older sister Constance 
in the family drapery shop in Bursley, one of the fictional “Five Towns” of the 
Staffordshire potteries. Sophia’s husband Gerald, however, insists on 
travelling straight to Auxerre to watch the execution of a murderer, whose 
severed head is supposed to fall neatly into that oh-so-symbolic “large open 
box”.


It’s fairly obvious from even the short passage above (this scene takes up a 
whole chapter) that Sophia experiences the execution as a traumatising sexual 
violation. In the previous chapter we’ve been told, carelessly, that she is “no 
longer a virgin” – and this “orgy” fills an empty space in the story: her 
honeymoon. The whole scene works by aural imagery as “a gigantic passionate 
roar, the culmination of the mob’s fierce savagery” signals the climax. Real 
knowledge – of sex, marriage, perhaps the nature of humanity itself – comes 
here at Auxerre. Gerald, Bennett pointedly observes, is consorting with a 
prostitute somewhere in the mêlée below.


I’m being a bit salacious here, admittedly, but even so, I couldn’t reconcile 
this with the Arnold Bennett described by Virginia Woolf as a “materialist”, 
who writes novels as crammed to excess as the omelette that bears his name and 
“spend[s] immense skill and immense industry making the trivial and the 
transitory appear the true and the enduring”. Even if we remember that in the 
1920s, when Woolf went for him, she was just an upstart Bloomsbury neophyte and 
Bennett had been in the bastion of British publishing for 20 years – she had a 
point to prove – and it’s a verdict that’s proved surprisingly enduring. 
(Margaret Drabble, a long-time admirer and biographer of Bennett, always blamed 
snobbery.)


The Old Wives’ Tale’s sheer unexpectedness is partly why it is a book I want 
to share. Sophia’s experience of the execution encapsulates what, for me, The 
Old Wives’ Tale is really about: ordinary people caught up in the complexities 
and contradictions of a historical moment they can’t comprehend, governed by 
inexorable forces beyond their control and from which they cannot escape. The 
Old Wives’ Tale is about the coming of modernity, a process endlessly renewing 
itself, captivating and then overtaking each generation in its course. Woolf, 
though I hardly dare say it, is wrong: it is precisely the “true and enduring” 
aspects of life that are Bennett’s theme.


The one thing that doesn’t surprise about this book, then, is the revelation 
that the passionate, impetuous Sophia has lived almost exactly the same life as 
Constance, who married the draper’s assistant, had a son and stayed in the 
house she was born in all her life. For Sophia, living through the siege of 
Paris and the Commune “meant chiefly that prices went down”. There is some 
irony in that observation, but it is not harsh or bitter. That, says Bennett, 
is what it is to be human.


This is the side to Bennett’s writing that I find curiously uplifting, despite 
the apparent fatalism of the plot: the tenderness with which he recognises that 
our families, upbringing and environment imprint us for life. We can rage 
against it, like Sophia (or Bennett himself, who left the Potteries as a young 
man and never lived there again), but it will always be visible in the intimate 
tiny details he catalogues, like this moment, when he describes Sophia 
recoiling from the execution above:


In vain she pressed her face into the pillow and listened to the irregular, 
prodigious noise of her eyelashes as they scraped the rough linen.

As John Carey, the literary critic and reviewer, once wrote, that noise had 
never been heard in English literature before. It deserves to be heard more.

 