
The phone in your pocket gives you powers that were hard to imagine even five 
years ago. It can talk to you, listen, and give sensible answers to questions. 
It knows your fingerprint and recognises your face and those of all your 
friends. It can buy almost anything, sell almost anything, bring you all the 
news you want, as well as almost all the books, films and music you might want 
to look at. What’s more, it will even allow you to talk to your friends and to 
communicate with almost anyone.

The problem is that these powers are not yours – at least they don’t belong to 
you alone. They belong to whoever controls the phone and can be used to serve 
their purposes as well as yours. Repressive governments and criminal gangs are 
all contending to break into phones today, and this kind of hacking will 
increasingly become the preferred route into all of the computer networks that 
we use – the ones we don’t call “phones”.

Apple’s sudden forced upgrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/apple-ios-update-arab-activists-iphone-spyware>
 to the iPhone operating system last week was a response to these anxieties. A 
dissident in the UAE appears to have had his iPhone hijacked by a very 
sophisticated piece of malware produced by a security company and sold legally, 
if in secret, to regimes that want to spy on their enemies. This offers its 
controllers complete knowledge of anything the infected phone is privy to: 
that’s all the contacts, all the messages of any sort, whether chats, texts or 
emails, all the calendars and even, potentially, any voice conversation that it 
overhears. It’s difficult to imagine a more assiduous or intimate spy. And once 
one phone has been subverted, it becomes a tool for spying into all other the 
networks to which it or the owner has access.

This is not exclusively Apple’s problem. The much more widespread Android 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/06/google-stagefright-megabug-patch-nexus-phones-samsung-android>
 is reasonably secure only on some Samsung and LG models and Google’s 
own-branded Nexus phones, which are updated frequently and automatically to 
keep abreast of security vulnerabilities. Other manufacturers have access to 
the updates but few get them installed in a timely fashion. In the poorer parts 
of the world, where Android has an overwhelming market share, the problem 
is especially acute. The Iranian secret police bug their dissidents using a 
tool (in the jargon of the trade, an Android RAT) calledKrakenAgent 
<http://blog.rigotechnology.com/2016/08/25/increased-use-of-android-malware-targeting-journalist/>
.

Beyond rogue nation states there is an unpleasant and insufficiently regulated 
market of legal firms that specialise in finding security vulnerabilities and 
selling them to the highest legal bidder, which normally means oppressive 
regimes; then there is a second tier of entirely illegal operators who sell 
tools to criminal gangs. Little of this is used for spying (though there is a 
market among jealous and abusive men for software that will enable to them to 
track their partners, one reason why some women’s shelters are reluctant to 
allow smartphones inside). Much more damage is done by “ransomware”, which 
encrypts and in effect steals all of a user’s data, to be released only on 
payment. Such assaults are becoming increasingly common. Twenty-nine NHS trusts
were targeted 
<http://www.information-age.com/technology/security/123461928/nhs-ransomware-revelation-reality-check>
 by them last year. This is a global problem now. Since almost every country 
will want these powers for its own security services, if for no one else, what 
is developing is something like an international arms trade. International 
efforts to police it are urgently needed and the companies that sell us these 
powerful phones must also be pressed to live up to their responsibilities to 
keep them safe so that their power is not easily turned against their owners.
 