
The only time I ever met Henry Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/henry-moore> was in the 1960s, when one of 
my first jobs, as a temporary British Council dogsbody, was to escort a 
visiting Israeli sculptor on a trip to Moore's headquarters at Much Hadham in 
Hertfordshire. We found him in his studio supervising a couple of assistants, 
all three dwarfed by the sloping mounds and cavities of a colossal work in 
progress made out of white poly­styrene. It was one of a steady stream of 
public pieces trundling out of Much Hadham ready to be finalised, as Moore 
explained, in bronze or marble. We set out on a motor tour of the grounds. When 
we reached another mighty piece positioned at the bottom of a field, Moore 
stopped the car, hopped out and made us both lie flat on the ground beneath his 
sculpture. "I want you to look up at it and think of infinity," he instructed 
his distinguished guest.

Timelessness, monumentality and permanence were essential qualities for Moore. 
He must have been the last major artist to see sculpture in these terms, and he 
was certainly by far the most successful in marketing it worldwide as a 
standard complement to the proliferating office blocks and municipal buildings 
constructed on a previously unheard-of scale from the 1950s onwards. For two or 
three decades he officially exemplified postwar civic reconstruction (and 
inevitably in due course its failures). "I grew up with a numbing sense of 
familiarity to his work," says one of the young British artists quoted in the 
catalogue to the Tate's new show. "There is something deeply unexotic about 
Henry Moore's work."

Its sleek glossy surfaces and elephantine mass, its towers and triumphal 
arches seeming to exude reassurance and nostalgia for a lost stability, spread 
everywhere. "I can't separate Moore from the idea of public space and of art 
seen in the context of town planning,' says Gareth Jones (whose own recent 
preference is for elegant understated works in materials such as Fablon, 
newsprint and chipboard). Commissions from 1950s English new towns, promptly 
followed by Unesco in Paris and the Lincoln Centre in New York, made a bronze 
or marble Moore an international badge of prestige and rank.

Cities vied for his attention. "Toronto was a hick town," said its mayor, 
explaining how the city bought its first Moore in 1966 in a successful attempt 
to reverse its image: "I was interested in seeing that it turned the corner of 
becoming a great metropolis" (Toronto is the Tate's partner in this 
exhibition). Ten years later a city-hall Moore did much the same for Dallas.

Moore's progress stupefied his fellow artists. For younger generations his 
work was a brooding presence, difficult to get through to and impossible to get 
away from. The Moore bronze on the forecourt of the Chelsea School of Art felt 
to student Steve Claydon "like an unwelcome uncle whose apparent intention it 
was to embarrass you in front of your friends". Moore himself had made a 
prescient drawing in 1942,Crowd Looking at a Tied-Up Object, showing a huddle 
of small, thin, nervous people staring up at a towering monolith, wrapped and 
roped like one of Moore's own later works in transit. Successive waves of 
sculptors had to fight back or be stifled by him. "Much of my early work was a 
kind of dismissal of Moore," says the stone-carver Peter Randall-Page. "I call 
him Heinrich Moore," says Michael Sandle.

In 1967 17 leading British artists – including Anthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro>, a former assistant from Much 
Hadham and himself now the grand old man of British sculpture – wrote to the 
Times repudiating Moore and all he stood for. The trouble was that for most of 
them it was Moore himself who had opened up the paths that he simultaneously 
blocked off. Their predicament was succinctly summed up two years later in 
Bruce McLean'sReclining Nude, Fully Draped, a photograph of a human body 
shrouded in an enormous rumpled sheet. "It's me (fully clothed, actually) 
underneath that dustsheet," said McLean.

For its first 40 years Moore's life had been a different story. Stone was his 
preferred medium and, though he always had supporters, his work remained 
largely unknown outside the tiny circles of a British avant garde. There were 
virtually no bronzes before 1939. What he liked was slamming into stone with 
punch and pitcher, or hewing treetrunks with an axe. Extreme violence – 
"knocking, carving or bursting pieces off" – was followed by interminable weeks 
or months of minute labour, "like a mouse gnawing a hole in a wall". The aim 
was a release of tensions in the stone that seemed to correspond to some sort 
of internal pressure in the sculptor himself.

Moore made his early works from odd slabs of local stone picked up cheap in 
masons' yards. Often, you can still sense the confines of the rectangular 
blocks they came from, but already they seem to take up more space than they 
actually occupy. The Tate show opens with a massively uncompromisingMother and 
Child in dark grey Hornton stone – "a small mountain of a work" said Antony 
Gormley – confronting allcomers in a powerful, lively, complicated knot of 
interlocking heads and arms.Woman with Upraised Arms looks from the back like a 
mountainside herself, a pale, freckled expanse of sloping stone with a long, 
straight stream of hair spilling down between her shoulder blades.

Landscape and the female figure ("in my work women must outnumber men by at 
least fifty to one") fused in Moore's imagination from the start. The lovely 
riverineReclining Figure of 1929, carved from a stone as muddy, soft and 
aqueous as the English weather, retains traces of watery origins in the shiny 
brown trickles of some mineral deposit animating elbow and knee, and in the 
wavy bands of drab grey and dirty yellow tracking horizontally through the 
rhythmic ­geometry of sturdy thighs and forearms. It is in part their ambiguity 
that gives these works a concentrated energy too often lacking from even the 
most polished of Moore's experiments with pure abstraction. They combine minute 
and drastically compressed observation with the ruthless vision of a 
practitioner who never stopped, never looked back, never did the same thing 
twice, working as if he risked his future with each fresh piece.

A group of a dozen young women with small, alert, expressive heads and 
expansive bodies await attention in the first room. Assured and humorous, 
lounging full length or poised calmly on slender, upright torsos, they 
nonetheless convey a palpable collective perplexity and disquiet. Several wring 
their hands. One with trapped tongue, pinpoint nose and squinty eyes seems to 
follow you round the show. A still more disconcerting figure, glistening like 
shiny, dappled frogskin, fixes her stare on the space above your head. These 
figures owe much to the ethnic prototypes Moore studied in the British Museum, 
and as much perhaps to Cézanne's bathers, nudes "sliced out of mountain rock" 
that came as a revelation when he first saw them in Paris as a student.

His studies of women suckling their children outraged contemporaries in the 
1930s, and it is not hard to see why. In the Tate's mother-and-baby room, 
mothers swerve back or gaze blankly anywhere but at the infants, replete and 
lolling or grabbing and gorging on the breast. Emotional dislocation culminates 
in an uncharacteristically explicit mother with serrated head who seems, as 
Lyndsey Stonebridge puts it in her catalogue essay, "about to throttle her 
child", itself a birdlike creature, all vicious pecking beak and frighteningly 
long thrashing neck.

But it was the containment of inner perturbation that remained always Moore's 
speciality. He was 41 when he sold aRecumbent Figure to the Contemporary Art 
Society in 1939 as a present for the Tate, whose most ­notorious director, JB 
Manson, had declared the year before that Moore would enter the gallery over 
his dead body. Manson was replaced and the gift accepted within 12 months.
Recumbent Figure is one of the highlights of the present show, an airy, 
graceful mass of striated stone that surrenders weight and density to the 
surging line of shoulder, buttock, hip and thigh, comprised in a single 
twisting curve like a wave with crests at either end on head and knee. Its 
purchase was a decisive stage in Moore's move from the private to the public 
arena. Two years later he finally gave up teaching to become a full-time 
artist. "It's never been like this for me before," he said in 1941, when the 
War Artists' Committee bought his drawings of people sheltering in the London 
underground from Nazi bombs, and asked for more.

If Moore's shelter drawings marked the point at which demand first outstripped 
supply, they also touched a depth of communal experience neither he nor anybody 
else had explored before. Moore said the only thing he could compare with the 
London shelters was the hold of a slave ship. The figures slumped beneath these 
cavernous vaults in Mooreish poses – sloping legs and supporting arms 
protruding from mounded bodies with broad, hollow laps – represent at bottom an 
unheroic civilian vision of war's passivity, helplessness and squalor. "They 
are life to which things (terrible things) are being done," Geoffrey Grigson 
wrote at the time. In retrospect some saw them as a foretaste of Belsen and 
Buchenwald. Certainly they were forerunners of the lank, fleshless, blank-eyed, 
slack-bellied bronze figures he made in the aftermath of the Holocaust.

Moore was unanimously promoted soon after the war as this country's 
representative of modern art, a role that turned out to be one part figurehead 
to three parts punchbag. It is difficult now to conceive the degree of 
ignorance behind this remarkable reversal, or to convey the sheer lack of 
information available in a Britain without TV, let alone the internet, at a 
time when there was no cheap foreign travel, no contemporary art galleries, no 
affordable artbooks, not even glossy magazines. Like most of my generation, I 
grew up knowing about modernism, if at all, from Punch cartoons in dentists' 
waiting rooms. I understood that it consisted of women with pinheads and holes 
where their hearts should be long before I saw my first real Moore.

This was not a specifically British condition, although it was admittedly 
aggravated by physical and moral insularity. The hostility spearheaded in this 
country by two former presidents of the Royal Academy, Alfred Munnings and 
Charles Wheeler (still protesting in the Times about "bronze oddities" as late 
as 1967), was replicated in civic warfare all over Europe and America wherever 
it was publicly proposed to buy or show Moore's work. His sculptures were 
decapitated in Dumfries and daubed with blue paint in Leeds. HisRecumbent Figure
 had her head chopped off on a wartime loan to MoMa in New York, hisSpindle 
Piece was vandalised with metal chains in Houston, and his Draped Seated Woman 
ended up tarred and feathered in the Ruhr.

The current show attempts to go back behind Moore's smooth beneficent public 
face to the secret impulses that prompted this visceral response. Its catalogue 
explores the turbulence and terror of what everyone who knew him agreed was a 
ferocious inner life, and traces his responses to the Spanish civil war as well 
as to the two world wars he lived through. The show stops in the late 50s, well 
short of the industrial production line he eventually set up to accommodate 
vastly increased output and incomings. It is a magnificent rehabilitation but 
it could have finished the job by arguing that Moore in his last two decades, 
when he modelled his work out of cheap, flimsy materials such as plaster, wax 
and polystyrene, was still as far ahead of his times as he always had been.

"It's having the idea how to do it that is difficult," he said, "not the 
physical effort." Moore's work, supremely visual, sensual and tactile in its 
early phases, remained intensely reflective to the end. He said he could never 
read a book on a train for fear of missing something outside the window. He 
started from the Yorkshire moors that surrounded him in childhood, 
incorporating in his work the forms of their component parts: caves, crags, 
hillsides, flints, pebbles, shells and bones. "You can feel that a bone has had 
some sort of use in its life; it has experienced tensions, has supported 
weights and has actually performed an organic function."

You could say the same of Moore's work over the entire span of his career. His 
early pieces go back to a world in some ways almost unimaginably different from 
our own. He went on to mirror in his work a communal postwar response to 
wholesale destruction, atrocity and dispersal as well as to the slow, brutal 
process of reconstruction that followed. He ended up complementing on a global 
scale the vast, bland, impersonal constructions of the evolving urban landscape 
that was his as much as ours.

Henry Moore is at Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> until 8 August. Tel: 020 
7887 8888. tate.org.uk/britain/
 