
It started with a fight. I had come to my own, rather negative, conclusions 
about Robert Atkins' high protein, low carbohydrate wonder diet and was busy 
criticising a friend who had started it in an attempt to lose a few pounds in 
time for the Christmas party season.

It was unhealthy, I argued. It encouraged the habit of eating too much fat. It 
would be too difficult to maintain and would put her in a constant bad mood. 
Losing so much weight so quickly (the diet's unique selling point) was a con, 
and I was convinced that scientists were on the verge of discovering the diet's 
evil, dirty secret.

There was no convincing her. She had become starry-eyed at the prospect of 
losing 10lb in the first fortnight and decided that the only way to shut me up 
was to slap me.

She followed immediately with another stinging attack: why was I talking about 
the diet and making conclusions about the difficulties of following it when I 
had no direct experience of it? Why didn't I put my opinions to the test and do 
the diet as an experiment?

So that is what I'm doing. With a team of scientists monitoring everything 
from my mood to the chemicals in my blood, it will be goodbye carbohydrates and 
a fatty welcome to cheese omelettes, steaks and spinach.

For the next few months, I'll be attempting to find out how it really feels 
and what it is really doing to my body - and mind.

Everything I actually knew about the Atkins diet had come from half-digested 
bits of information from newspapers, television and the odd radio phone-in. I 
had no real idea whether there was much science to support or deny it - other 
than from the relatively polarised reactions from the fans or the critics. And 
I didn't really have any clue about the nuts and bolts of the diet; assuming, 
perhaps like everybody else, that it just involved eating several greasy steaks 
a day and drinking double cream by the gallon.

Forget counting calories, it says. Don't swap the rich, creamy foods you 
actually like eating for the low fat alternatives that taste worse than the 
cardboard boxes they come in. Eat as much meat as you like. And fat is no 
longer the enemy: spread oil and mayonnaise liberally on everything you eat and 
feel free to fry your food.

Just avoid bread, rice, potatoes and pasta at all costs. Cut down on your 
vegetables, throw out your fruits and, while you're at it, be careful to skip 
all types of sugar.

Carbohydrates of all kinds are the body's main source of quick-release fuel 
and Atkins's theory is that, by depleting the body's store of them, you force 
yourself into an unusual situa tion.

First of all, you will stop releasing floods of insulin, the chemical that 
Atkins refers to in his book as the "fattening hormone". The claim is that this 
reduction in insulin means less fat stored in the body.

Another effect is that eating so many proteins forces the kidneys to work 
harder to get rid of them and this also uses up lots of calories. In 
Atkins-speak, this means you can lose weight while you watch television

Like most children, I had spent years finding creative ways to avoid the dull 
green vegetables that my parents heaped on to my dinner plate. But, in later 
years, I had come to the reluctant conclusion that a low fat, 
five-fruits-and-vegetables-a-day lifestyle was the only healthy way to eat. Fat 
was the seductive enemy: it might taste great, but be careful not to let it 
suck you in. Those who succumbed faced a horrible future of high blood 
pressure, heart disease and the countless diseases linked with obesity.

But more than 30 million people over the last quarter of a century are 
reckoned to have followed Dr Atkins's advice to up your protein and fat and cut 
out the carbs. Dr Atkins himself was not unaware of the controversy. His book 
is defensive from the outset, explaining away supposed fallacies and myths 
about his method before you can even jab a carbohydrate-addicted finger in its 
direction. The diet is bad for your kidneys? No, says the good doctor, that's 
just a bad case of Chinese whispers. Bad breath? Ah, that would be the ketones, 
which actually smell rather sweet. Just chew some parsley and you'll be all 
right. The diet is not balanced? Actually it provides more nutrients than the 
average American diet. And so on.

Indeed, last year, a paper in the highly respected New England Journal of 
Medicine showed that people on low carbohydrate diets lost more weight than 
those on low fat diets. And there seemed to be no specific adverse health 
effects either.

Reading the book further, you begin to suspect that Dr Atkins is inviting you 
to, Matrix-style, open your eyes to the reality that has always been denied to 
you. It's like joining a friendly cult; Atkins had a habit, for example, of 
crowbarring exclamation marks into sentences as if he has bought a job lot of 
them at a punctuation mark sale. "Lose weight! Increase energy! Look great!" 
And those are just the first three sentences in the book.

Before his death at 18 stone, Atkins was not afraid to tackle his critics 
head-on. He didn't just rebut claims that the diet involved eating too much fat 
and could, for example, raise cholesterol. Atkins went right to the other 
extreme, outlining positive health benefits of following his method. He urged 
dieters to take blood tests before and then six weeks into the programme, to 
prove that cholesterol actually did fall if you followed his instructions 
properly.

Atkins also claimed that the followers of the diet would latch on to some 
misplaced, long-lost energy. Some people, he says, will even feel slightly 
euphoric - the psychological effect of diet is well documented and scientists 
are already looking at how cutting carbs out of your diet can affect mood.

So, by the time you read this, I'll have abandoned sandwiches, be starving my 
sweet tooth and be avoiding pubs in case the temptation for carbohydrate-rich 
beer becomes overwhelming. And in a few weeks, I'll be reporting back with the 
results from my team of scientists. Wish me luck.

Further reading

The British home page of Atkins Nutritionals: atkins-uk.com 
<http://www.atkins-uk.com/>

Do you have any tips, questions or morale-boosting messages for Alok? post 
them here:The Atkins experiment <http://talk.theguardian.com/WebX?50@@.685f12a7>
 