
Many years ago I signed a contract to write a book about Cairo; my Cairo. But 
the years passed, and I couldn't write it; when I tried, it read like an elegy, 
and I would not write an elegy for my city.

Then, in February 2011, I was in Tahrir Square, taking part in the revolution, 
and reporting on it. My friend and publisher called me: this, she said, must be 
the moment for your Cairo book. I fought it. But I feared she was right.

I say "feared" because I wanted more to act in the revolution than to write 
about it. And because I was afraid of the responsibility.Jean Genet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/05/jean-genet-hero-ahdaf-soueif>, 
in his book that I most admire,Un Captif Amoureux (Prisoner of Love), writes of 
the Palestinian revolution (1970): "I am not an archivist or a historian or 
anything like it … This is my Palestinian revolution, told in my own chosen 
order." I cannot say the same. This story is told in my own chosen order, but 
it is very much the story of our revolution.

It proved impossible to sit in a corner and write about the revolution. What 
was happening, what is happening, needed and needs every one of us to be 
available at all times to do whatever "the revolutionary effort" might need; 
whether it's marching or standing or talking or mediating or writing or 
comforting or articulating or bearing witness … So I tried to "revolute" and 
write at the same time, and I soon realised that for the book to be as I wanted 
it to be and believed it should be, an intervention, rather than just a record, 
it needed to take in – and on – as much of the present as possible. And the 
present was, naturally, constantly changing.

A revolution is a process, not an event. And, as you know, our Egyptian 
revolution is ongoing. And its path has not been smooth. How could it have been 
when the interests we are seeking to break free of are so powerful and so 
pervasive? But we were given 18 golden days; 18 days when we all pulled 
together to get rid of the head of the regime that was destroying us and our 
country and everything we held dear; 18 days that brought out the best in us 
and showed us not just what we could do, but how we could be.

Friday 28 January 5pm


The river is a still, steely grey, a dull pewter. Small scattered fires burn 
and fizz in the water. We've pushed out from the shore below the Ramses Hilton 
and are heading into mid-stream. My two nieces, Salma and Mariam, are on either 
side of me in the small motor boat. As we get further from the shore our 
coughing and choking subsides. We can draw breath, even though the breath 
burns. And we can open our eyes.

To see an opaque dusk, heavy with tear gas. Up ahead, Qasr el-Nil Bridge 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2011/01/the-taking-of-kasr-al-nil.html>
 is a mass of people, all in motion, but all in place. We look back at where we 
were just minutes ago, on 6 October Bridge, and see a central security forces 
personnel carrier on fire, backing off, four young men chasing it, leaping at 
it, beating at its windscreen. The vehicle is reversing wildly, careering 
backwards east towards the city centre. Behind us, a ball of fire lands in the 
river; a bright new pool of flame in the water. The sky too is grey – so 
different from the airy twilight you normally get on the river at this time of 
day. The Opera House looms dark on our right and we can barely make out the 
slender height of the Cairo Tower. We don't know it yet, but the lights of 
Cairo will not come on tonight.

A great shout goes up from Qasr el-Nil. I look at Salma and Mariam. "Yes, 
let's," they say. I tell the boatman we've changed our minds: we don't want to 
cross the river to Giza and go home, we want to be dropped off under Qasr 
el-Nil Bridge.

And that is why we – me and two beautiful young women – appeared suddenly in 
the Qasr el-Nil underpass among the central security vehicles racing to get out 
of town and all the men leaning over the parapet above us with stones in their 
hands stopped in mid-throw and yelling "Run! Run!" and holding off with the 
stones so they wouldn't hit us as we skittered through the screeching vehicles 
to a spot where we could scramble up the bank and join the people at the bridge.

We scrambled up the bank and found ourselves part of the masses. When we'd 
seen the crowd from a distance it had seemed like one solid bulk. Close up like 
this, it was people, individuals with spaces between them – spaces into which 
you could fit. We stood on the traffic island in the middle of the road. Behind 
us was Qasr el-Nil Bridge, in front of us was Tahrir, and we were doing what we 
Egyptians do best, and what the regime ruling us had tried so hard to destroy: 
we had come together, as individuals, millions of us, in a great co-operative 
effort. And this time our project was to save and to reclaim our country. We 
stood on the island in the middle of the road, and that was the moment I became 
part of the revolution.

I have shied away from writing about Cairo. It hurt too much. But now, 
miraculously, it doesn't. Because my city is mine again.

"Masr" is Egypt, and "Masr" is also what Egyptians call Cairo. On Tuesday 1 
February, I watched a man surveying the scene in Tahrir with a big smile – the 
sun was shining and people were everywhere, old and young, rich and poor, they 
talked and walked and sang and played and joked and chanted. Then he said it 
out loud: "Ya Masr, it's been a long time. We have missed you."

On the traffic island at the Qasr el-Nil entrance to Tahrir you turned 360 
degrees and everywhere there were people. I could not tell how many thousands I 
could see. Close up, people were handing out tissues soaked in vinegar for your 
nose, Pepsi to bathe your eyes, water to drink. I stumbled, and a hand under my 
elbow steadied me. The way ahead of us was invisible behind the smoke. From 
time to time there would be a burst of flame. The great hotels – the Semiramis 
Intercontinental, Shepheard's, the Ramses Hilton – had all darkened their lower 
floors and locked their doors. On the upper-floor balconies stick figures were 
watching us. At the other end of the Midan, from the roof of the American 
University, the snipers were watching us, too. Silently. Everywhere there was a 
continuous thud of guns, and from time to time a loud, intermittent rattling 
sound. We stood. That was our job, the people at the back. We stood and we 
chanted our declaration of peace, "Selmeyya! Selmeyya!", while our comrades at 
the front, unarmed, fought with the security forces. From time to time a great 
cry would go up and we would surge forward: our friends had won us another 
couple of metres and we followed them and held our ground. We sang the national 
anthem. On 28 January, standing at that momentous crossroads, the Nile behind 
us, the Arab League building to our left, the old ministry of foreign affairs 
to our right, seeing nothing up ahead except the gas and smoke and fire that 
stood between us and our capital, we stood our ground and sang and chanted, and 
placed our lives – with all trust and confidence – in one another's hands.

Some of us died.

Many of us had not yet truly realised what we were engaged in; what the 
country was engaged in. We were still calling what we were doing "protesting" – 
and we had been protesting for 10 years. I think every time I've arrived in 
Cairo – and that's three or four times a year – I've joined my sister and 
various friends on protests: marches to support thePalestinian intifada 
<http://www.intifada-palestine.com/>, marches against the war on Iraq, protests 
against our rigged elections, our co-opted judiciary, against the plots to 
perpetuate the regime by slitheringGamal Mubarak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/21/protests-egypt-gamal-mubarak-succession>
 into power, against corruption and against police brutality. The government 
was vicious in dealing with all of them.

Looking back now we see the progression, from small groups collecting 
medicines for the intifada, to the civil movement, Kifaya, hitting the streets, 
to the massive workers' strikes in Mahalla, to the point where every sector in 
civil society – judges, lawyers, farmers, teachers, pensioners, journalists, 
tax collectors – was fighting with the government. And I see it, too, in my 
family. Like so many politically engaged Egyptian families it's now in its 
third generation of activists – and this third generation, in their 20s, are 
cleverer and cooler and more effective than we ever were.

Friday 4 February


It's morning and I'm leaving for Tahrir. My family is already there. It's 
become a tradition: Friday and Tuesday we get at least a million people out on 
the streets. Last Friday, the 28th, was the Day of Wrath, today is the Day of 
Departure – Mubarak's, we hope. It's also become a tradition that Friday 
(Muslim) prayers in Tahrir are followed by (Christian) mass – with everybody 
joining in both sets of "amens".Sheikh Mazhar Shaheen 
<http://news.egypt.com/english/permalink/26277.html>, the young imam of Omar 
Makram Mosque, speaks what's on people's minds and links our actions to 
spiritual values. He addresses his sermon to "Egyptians", and he speaks of 
"Christ's example". He ends by praying to God to "make us stand fast. Restore 
our rights. We want not war but peace. Bear witness that we love Egypt and hold 
the dust of this land dear. Restore our dignity. Unite us and let not our blood 
be spilled." Our great communal "amens" roll through the Midan.

The questions that are being settled on the streets of Egypt are of concern to 
everyone. The paramount one is this: can a people's revolution succeeed that is 
determinedly democratic, grassroots, inclusive and peaceable?

4pm


Delegations from many Egyptian cities and governorates are here. The regime 
has stopped the trains running, but people have got here anyway. The flags and 
banners of Alexandria, Assiut, Beheira, Herghada, Port Said, Qena, Sohag, Suez 
and others are flying. The chant is: "El-shar3eyya m'nel-Tahrir." Legitimacy 
comes from Tahrir.

I look back now at the spectacle of us, the people, in all our variety, 
picnicking, strolling, camping, chanting, on the street of the ministries 
between our parliament and our cabinet office on Tuesday 8 February; my aunt 
and I and a few thousand people outside the railings. It would be simple to go 
in and occupy them both. And it's not fear that holds us back. How can these
shabab be afraid after their attempt on the interior ministry down the road – 
when for three days they surged against that fortress of evil, facing bullets 
and gas? Or after Bloody Wednesday, when they defended the Midan against 
cavalry and molotovs and snipers and militias? No, we the people were 
implementing a doctrine of minimum force, minimum destruction. This was a 
revolution that respected the law, that had at its heart the desire to reclaim 
the institutions of state, not to destroy them.

Would we have ended up in a better place if we had been more violent?

11 February 6pm


It happens. A brief statement delivered by Omar Suleiman 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2011/01/who-is-omar-suleiman.html>
 looking even deader than usual, with a scowling, heavy-set man in the frame 
behind him: Hosni Mubarak has stepped aside; the armed forces are in control of 
the country.

8pm


You can hardly see the lions on Qasr el-Nil Bridge for the kids climbing on to 
them. All the mobiles held high; everybody being photographed in the moment. 
I'm part of the surge of happy humanity flowing across the bridge. Beneath us, 
our river, alight with sparkling lights, with fireworks, with song. Then, 
Tahrir.

You breathe deep when you get to Tahrir. A steady roar rises from it and there 
are more fireworks, and a million flags are waving and banners fly: "No More 
Torture!" "Welcome to Tomorrow!" "Congratulations to the World!" We're crying 
and laughing and jumping and hugging and singing, and now the (football) Ultras 
are circling the Midan, their energy like an electric current fizzing off the 
walls of the Arab League: "Everyone who loves Egypt, come and help fix Egypt"; 
off theMugamma3 building <http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/mugamma.htm>: 
"We'll get married, we'll have kids"; off the Egyptian Museum: "Lift your head 
up high, you're Egyptian. Lift your head up high, you're Egyptian. Lift your 
head up …"

And in the centre of the Midan a stillness. The pictures of the murdered. The 
martyrs.Sally Zahran 
<http://www.salon.com/2011/02/08/egypt_protests_victims_hosni_mubarak/>, 
massive blows to the head, glances upwards and smiles. Muhammad Abd el-Menem, 
shot in the head, his hair carefully gelled. Ali Muhsin, shot, carries a 
laughing toddler with a big blue sea behind him.Muhammad Bassiouny 
<http://kentgh.wordpress.com/2011/02/15/profile-ahmed-bassiouny-%E2%80%93-an-egyptian-fallen-hero/>
, shot, lies back with his two kids. Muhammad Emad holds his arms open wide and 
wears a "London" T-shirt. Ihab Muhammadi smiles but his eyes are thoughtful … 
and more, 843 more. In the triumph and joy and uncertainty of the moment, they 
are the still centre; the young people, theshabab, who walked into the Midan, 
in peace, to save their country and to save us. Our future has been paid for 
with their lives. There is no turning back.

Monday 1 August/1 Ramadan


I see the tweets at about one o'clock: "Tanks moving into Bab el-Louq. Must be 
heading for Tahrir."

"We have to open the Midan." "We have to open the Midan now."

I get to Qasr el-Nil Bridge and run into the battalion arriving to control its 
entrance into Tahrir. They're maybe 50 men. They look like army – tall and 
well-built and disciplined – rather than police or central security, but 
they're in black. They're carrying long, rough wooden sticks.

The Midan is a massive wreck, a giant tip. They've demolished our small city. 
It's like a scene in a film when an army's been through an enemy village: 
everything's razed to the ground. The military pass through, and the tents, 
flags, banners, billboards – everything is transformed into rubbish. Soldiers 
are on the move everywhere. We see young men being pushed by soldiers towards 
tanks, and we see soldiers deliberately breaking up unresisting chairs and 
tables.

The Tahrir Cinema <http://www.cinerevolutionnow.com/2011/07/tahrir-cinema.html>
 screen is on the ground, broken up by our army, the cables cut and tangled. I 
see the screen on the ground, then I see a child dragging a blanket behind him 
and crying. Then I see other children – street children for whom the Midan had 
brokered a truce with their cruel lives and who'd found shelter in the central 
garden between the tents; the revolutionaryshabab had held classes for anyone 
who wanted to learn to read or write, shared their food with them and given 
them responsibilities. The children spread mats and connected wires, and held 
lights and cameras. All this is in ruins now.

31 October 2011


This is my last day of writing. We are still fighting.

For weeks through August, central security forces occupied the central garden 
of the Midan. And in September we found out that the regime had been planning 
to sell Tahrir. They'd been planning to sell the central public space in our 
capital to a hotel chain – to a foreign hotel chain, because "Hosni Mubarak's 
government was worried about large gatherings and protests … in central Cairo".

What is legal and what is not? The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/02/10/world/middleeast/20110210-egypt-supreme-council.html>
 (Scaf) makes up the rules as it goes along. The right to protest is enshrined 
in law, it says. But protestors in front of the Israeli embassy are brutalised 
and hauled off to military trial. And every one of the incidents that have 
marked the last eight months has registered a worsening of the relationship 
between the people and the army.

The question for us now is will we have the parliamentary elections scheduled 
for 28 November? Many of us think theMaspero event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feedarticle/9891563> (which left 26 people 
dead) was meant to cause enough civil unrest to give Scaf an excuse to declare 
martial law and postpone elections. It didn't work. Will it work next time? 
Will there be a next time?

"Not one of us is going to step back into the nightmare," I wrote eight months 
ago. But the nightmare chases us, surprises us, attacks us. So far we have 
beaten it back.

We are not alone. We were never alone; the feelings, the prayers, the messages 
that came pouring into Egypt from every place on earth during those 18 days of 
Tahrir lodged in our minds and in our hearts, and affirmed every minute what we 
knew already: that the freedom we sought was the freedom the people of the 
world wanted, for us and for themselves. And what has been happening across the 
planet since has confirmed and reconfirmed our belief. The first placards 
raised in Wisconsin, the street signs invented for the City of London, the 
words we hear from Tokyo to Wall Street, the chants in Oakland, California – 
all echo the call from Tahrir and Tunis: the people demand the fall of this – 
entire – regime.

My father, who's 87, says we shall prevail, because "we" are a people fighting 
for what's right, and "they" are a faction fighting for a sliver of gain. Well, 
there are many bad possibilities. But there are more good ones. I believe that 
optimism is a duty – if people had not been optimistic on 25 January, and all 
the days that followed, they would not have left their homes or put their 
vulnerable human bodies on the streets. Our revolution would not have happened.
 