
The Longitude Prize <https://longitudeprize.org/> is a very smart idea. The 
prize is a handsome £8m and it awaits the first individual or (more probably) 
team that develops a quick, cheap and reliable way of stopping overuse or 
misuse of antibiotics. The diagnostic – it might be a strip of sensitised paper 
or it might be a mobile phone app – must be capable of being used anywhere in 
the world. Next week another round of assessment of ideas begins from the 138 
teams so far registered.

A prize is smart economics to encourage smart science. It counters the lack of 
a strong market incentive to develop a diagnostic for which there is an 
overwhelming need – while reminding the rest of us to remember, next time we 
see the doctor, the urgency of the crisis.Antibiotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/antibiotics>, it is reckoned, add 20 years 
to life expectancy; resistance is growing so fast that already 700,000 people 
die each year from untreatable infections. From the exotic, like typhoid, to 
the all too domesticClostridium difficile, the pathogens that once succumbed 
swiftly to penicillin and other antibiotics now fight back. They are becoming 
killers again.

Finding a diagnostic that can be made universally available isn’t going to 
save the world. But as the economist Jim O’Neill argued inhis report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/no-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance>
 on antimicrobial resistance published last week, when more than half of all 
prescriptions for antibiotics may be unnecessary, developing a globally 
available test is going to be part of the solution to keeping them viable for 
another generation. Antibiotic resistance arises when a drug wipes out the 
weediest organisms in a population, leaving hardier ones behind that pass on 
their genes. Then, when this next generation is hit with drugs, the weediest of 
those are killed off, leaving a bunch behind that are hardier still. Simply
reducing the number of times a type of bacteria is challenged 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21699115-evolution-pathogens-making-many-medical-problems-worse-time-take-drug-resistance>
 might, counter-intuitively, stop it growing more resistant. Walk softly and 
carry a big stick.

Economics isn’t working here. That’s partly why new generations of antibiotics 
emerge so infrequently. Earlier generations are now cheap and plentiful and 
increasingly ineffective. New ones are very hard to develop, and might never be 
licensed for mass distribution but instead reserved as a weapon of last resort. 
There’s not much profit in either. Lord O’Neill proposed a “play or pay” levy 
on big pharmaceutical companies; the ones that didn’t invest in research and 
development would be required to help those that did. The industry reaction was 
negative.

The problem of antibiotic resistance is about science and economics, and it 
faces society itself, locally and globally, with hard questions, too. It pits 
individual benefit against the common good: your sore throat, our ability to 
survive a hospital stay. It demands recognition that a personal benefit may at 
a distance have a much greater cost.

If that was the extent of the problem, it would be challenge enough. But it is 
much worse than that. The EU has banned the use of antibiotics in farm animals. 
In the US and China and many other countries, they are a commonplace growth 
enhancer. They deliver fatter pigs and bigger profits to farmers, more cheap 
food to swelling populations. All the cheap and effective diagnostic kits in 
the world will be futile if there is no agreement to end this rival abuse of 
scientific knowledge. Like climate change, there is only one big way to meet 
the threat. Together.
 