
Asking a restaurant critic what they thought of their meal is never a good 
idea, not least because they will eventually tell you anyway. Proof that no 
good can come from it arrives with news thatthe chef of a restaurant in the 
Brecon Beacons was this week prosecuted for beating up an employee 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-14535378> after AA Gill of the Sunday Times 
had replied to staff who asked this question that his meal had been 
"disgusting".

The fact that Gill, a man who, for the shock value, once wrote about the 
pleasure of shooting dead a baboon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/oct/26/aa-gill-shot-baboon>, then went on 
to give the restaurant four out of five stars should simply stand as a warning 
to others.
It is, to be honest, a question most of us in the restaurant-reviewing game 
dread. Apart from Marina O'Loughlin of London's Metro,who guards her identity 
more keenly than a lioness her cubs 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/news/35678-metros-marinas-a-decadent-foodie>, none of 
us who eats for a living is really anonymous. Even if you don't appear on 
television, the restaurant world has mug shots of you within months of your 
taking up the job. So the words, "How was your meal?" are rarely innocent. In 
my experience the word "fine" covers a multitude of sins. Everything is always 
fine. It is neutral enough that if the subsequent review is a stinker the 
restaurant can't complain I gave them false hope, while also being civil enough 
to grease proceedings. People eating with me are also instructed to use the "F" 
word, because what my companions think of the food is irrelevant. I'm not 
interested in their opinions; I only want them there so I can order more stuff.

Of course the perils of being spotted do not end at the dreaded question. 
There's also the bill. When most people query the bill it is to get things 
taken off that they didn't have. I regularly have to get things I did haveput on
, these having been apparently mislaid in an attempt to make the joint look 
cheaper. But the very worst moment is when the chef is forced by the management 
to come out to my table and greet me, wet-lipped and eager, like a beered-up 
adolescent hoping for a snog. In the age-old traditions of the media all I can 
do then is make my excuses and leave.
 