

I’ve often thought of books as a gift and the act of reading as opening that 
gift: the sense of the unexpected, the feeling of having been enriched by 
something priceless. Rummaging in the local library as a child felt like 
rootling through a treasure chest, not knowing what jewel of a story I would 
come across next. By borrowing and returning books, I developed a strong sense 
that stories were meant to be shared.


So what a delight to read Lewis Hyde’s The Gift, and find it unfolding into 
gifts wrapped within gifts. Hailed by Margaret Atwood as a masterpiece and a 
“classic study of gift-giving and its relationship to art”, this passionate 
paean to creativity has been acquiring fans ever since it was published in 
1983. When I recently bought a copy as a Christmas gift, the bookseller’s eyes 
lit up.

Subtitled How the Creative Spirit Transforms the World, The Gift is 
fascinating on the power of art to take us beyond ourselves. It is also a call 
to use the gifts we have been given. “It is the talent which is not in use that 
is lost or atrophies, and to bestow one of our creations is the surest way to 
invoke the next,” writes Hyde, who cites Homer’s Hymn to Hermes. “Hermes 
invents the first musical instrument, the lyre, and gives it to his brother, 
Apollo, whereupon he is immediately inspired to invent a second musical 
instrument, the pipes. The implication is that giving the first creation away 
makes the second one possible. Bestowal creates that empty place into which new 
energy may flow. The alternative is petrification, writer’s block, ‘the flow of 
life backed up’.”

This particular gift of a book sat unopened for many months, gathering dust in 
storage during a peripatetic period of my existence. Quite some time after 
receiving it, I brushed away the dust and turned its pages: “Gifts pass from 
hand to hand: they endure through such transmission, as every time a gift is 
given it is enlivened and regenerated through the new spiritual life it 
engenders both in the giver and in the receiver”, writes Atwood in a 
thought-provoking introduction to the new edition.

How is a creative artist to survive in a society dominated by market exchange? 
Hyde describes how he himself first came to the book’s topic as he tried to 
make his way as a poet and translator: “Inevitably the money question comes up; 
labours such as mine are notoriously non-remunerative, and the landlord is not 
interested in your book of translations the day the rent falls due.” This theme 
struck a chord with me as I toiled to make ends meet as a freelance writer, 
moving between rented rooms.

The book also tackles age-old questions about the individual in a community 
(“Should you spend Christmas with your family if you’re trying to solidify an 
identity of your own?”) and large philosophical issues (“How much of yourself 
can you give away before evaporating?”) Atwood’s introduction to the latest 
edition also considers thorny contemporary issues such as “the tendency of the 
internet to demand that everything on it be somehow ‘free’”.

The Gift would be a good present at any time of year, but particularly this 
month as we frantically go about our last-minute shopping. At its heart is the 
idea of reciprocity: “You may keep your Christmas present,” Hyde writes at one 
point, “but it ceases to be a gift in the true sense unless you have given 
something else away.” He frequently returns to the idea that “a gift eventually 
circles back toward its source”. A section is devoted to the poet Walt Whitman, 
who believed “the gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him – it cannot 
fail”.

I love the book’s interweaving of wisdom from different ages and places, from 
ancient folk and fairytales to modern-day stories, which sets our present-day 
behaviour in a wide historical perspective. So much literature is about 
yearning, absence, loss, that it is intriguing to read about its opposite: 
giving abundantly, even when we think we lack. Many folktales are about the 
virtue of sharing, the vice of selfishness, but there is also a rich tradition 
of poetry about wanting to give, yet having only immaterial – but priceless - 
things to offer.

I would share The Gift not only with anyone grappling with the question of how 
to balance a creative passion with making a living, anyone interested in life 
and literature, but also with “all thinking humans” (Lewis’s original intended 
audience).
 