
The young men appeared. One of them pulled at her bag. I didn't know what to 
do.

I raised a hand. I shouted, "Hey". 

I watched as my briefcase fell to the floor and they kicked me into 
unconsciousness.

* * * 

Still as a remote viewer, I saw myself in a series of disconnected images. 
First in the ambulance, then in a private room. The nurse was with me when I 
awoke.

"So I'm alive," I said. 

I was discharged a few days later. On the way home, the cab driver told me it 
was OK to take things easy. I undressed to find my bandages covered in blood. I 
tore them off to examine the wound, but there was only a small pinhole emitting 
a fountain of blood.

Anthony made me a cup of coffee. Didn't he remember how much I detested it? 
What kind of friend was he?

"I think something strange is happening," I remarked. 

"You may be brain damaged," said Mary. "You should go back to hospital." 

I walked. A car skidded to a halt. "Get in," said the nurse. 

* * * 

 "Can you hear me?" the nurse said. 

I grabbed his arm. 

He rose slowly. "Never mind. We'll try again tomorrow." 

* * * 

"I think I've just understood what happened," I said to Catherine. "I dreamed 
I woke up, but I was still in a coma."

"That's pretty deep, Carl," she replied. "Because you're still unconscious. I 
suppose that means the same thing's going to happen in the second half of the 
book."

I could feel myself disappearing ever further up my arsehole. I had to 
reconnect with my inner self to get myself to wake up.

I went into a record shop to search for the catalyst to my life. "Could you 
play this for me?" I asked, handing over Good Golly Miss Molly.

He did so. "It's a bit repetitive," I said. 

Things got worse in the bookshop. "Why is the only sentence in the entire 
book, Call Me Ishmael, repeated three hundred thousand times?"

The assistant replied: "You clearly know a thing or two about dull writing." 

It was no good. I had to find my childhood home. 

"Where is it?" asked the cabby. 

"I can't remember exactly. Somewhere in the suburbs." 

"I know where you mean." 

I climbed to my parents' room, but just as I was about to awake something 
pulled me back. And then I had it. Either sleeping or awake, this was who I 
was. I could string together a random series of words, CUBA TOKE DRILL TALLOW, 
and I would still be me. Cool, huh?

Catherine and I made love and went for a walk. "This is idyllic," I said. 

In the final relocation, I saw the young men kicking me again. And then I woke 
and picked up the briefcase.

 The digested read ... digested


Am I conscious? You won't be by the end.
 