
"Stop!" Jake had become a lot more sociable since his hysterectomy two years 
ago, but he still had a bark on him. "Don't get up without your stick!"

Anna smiled wisely at her carer in that wise old way she had been smiling at 
all her kooky west coast friends since her first appearance in the late 1970s. 
Now aged 92, she wanted nothing more than to reminisce about how wacky they had 
all been back in the day, and to get gently stoned while rearranging her 
collection of Taoist dildos.

Her cellphone played its ironic ringtone of Three Times a Lady 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B4dl6JSf-bc>. It was Brian, yet another of her 
former tenants, who was now living in an RV park on the ocean side of the city. 
"I've someone I want you to meet," he said.

Later, when they met up, he told her: "This is Wren. She was once voted LA's 
sexiest fattest woman. She's also worked as a stripper, has been an extreme 
rebirther, and was abducted by aliens. We've just got married."

"I'm very happy for you both," said Anna, maintaining her reputation for 
zen-like interest in the ever-more-improbable backstories of characters who had 
once delighted her but were now just a bit tedious. Besides, the only backstory 
she was really interested in these days was her own – as the legendary 
transsexual Anna Madrigal.

Andy, as she had been born, had felt insecure growing up as a teenager in a 
Nevada brothel in the 1930s. "Let's get out of here and move to San Francisco," 
said his only friend, Lazlo. "And while you're about it, why don't you suck my 
cock?" "Oh no," Andy had cried. "I'm not at all that way inclined. I'm a lady!"

Michael, another one of her former tenants, snuggled up to his soulmate Ben, 
while their labradoodle snoozed in itsBurberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> basket. "Do you remember 
when being gay was just the wildest thing? Don't you think it's a bit sad that 
we've all lost our edge and become cosy figures of the establishment?"

"You're so sweet," replied Ben. "Let's go out to that new sushi bar."

"That would be amazeballs," said Shawna, who had only that morning pleasured 
herself to the most intense orgasm. "If you just give me half an hour to remind 
you all of how Brian brought me up as his daughter, how really wacky and 
independent I am, and how brilliant my novel written in txtspk is, I'll be with 
you. By the way, did I mention I'm looking for a sperm donor?

"My dad's just paid for me to have sex with one of your mother's friends," 
said Lazlo. Andy panicked. This could not be! He would leave a note saying 
Lazlo was gay.

"I really admire you for having a sex-change operation and living to 90," said 
Wren.

"Did you know Anna Madrigal is an anagram of A Man and a Girl?" said Anna.

"That's odd," said Wren. "Wren Douglas is an anagram of Large Wounds."

"Wow," cried Brian. "I've just realised Brian Edda is an anagram of Brain 
Dead."

"Some things are meant to be," said Anna gnomically. "Thank you so much for 
bringing me out to Nevada. I feel as if all my issues about Lazlo's suicide 
have now been resolved."

"Fantackytastic," screamed Shawna. "Now you can join all the rest of us at the 
Burning Man festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/picture/2012/aug/31/eyewitness-burning-man-festival-nevada>
. We will be in the Chakralicious tent. Now who'll be my sperm donor? Eeny 
meeny ..."

Just then a divine lesbian called Juliette appeared from nowhere. Shawna fell 
on her hungrily with a hungry pansexuality. "I'm having a baby," sobbed 
Juliette. "Hmm," Shawna gasped. "Maybe I don't need one of my own after all."

"Oh my Godz," said Michael. "This MDMA is like amazing. I'm so on for a lie 
down in the orgy marquee."

"Help! Help!" Ben yelled. "Mike's had a heart attack while being sucked off by 
a teenager."

"No he hasn't," said Anna serenely. "He's just got a bit of wind. It happens 
at his age."

"Oh Anna!" everyone worshipped. "You're so wise and clever. You have the soul 
of a monarch butterfly. What'll we do when you die?"

"Fuck knows. But bring it on."

Digested read, digested: White tran gran.
 