
You wouldn't want to be in her shoes. A former middle-ranking staffer at the 
US securities and exchange commission by the name of Meaghan Cheung is getting 
an unwanted few minutes of fame over the agency's consistent failure to spot 
that Bernard Madoff's investment firm didn't, actually, contain $50bn (£33bn).

Until recently, Cheung worked in the SEC's New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> office. She has been singled out 
unflatteringly by Harry Markopolos, a whistleblower who repeatedly tried to 
warn the SEC of suspicions surrounding Madoff.

"Cheung, branch chief in New York, actually investigated [allegations over 
Madoff] but with no result that I am aware of. In my conversations with her, I 
did not believe that she had the derivatives or mathematical background to 
understand the violation," Markopolos wrote in an email to the SEC.

When confronted outside her Manhattan apartment by the New York Post, 
Cheung said she was just "mid-level management" under many levels of 
supervision, adding: "If someone provides you with the wrong set of books, I 
don't know how you find the real books."

Cheung, a 37-year-old Yale graduate who was snapped wearing a blue woolly hat 
and spectacles, adopted an impressively combative stance with the Murdoch 
tabloid: "Why are you taking a mid-level staff person and making me responsible 
for the failure of the American economy?"

They've had their chips

How about starting the new year with a healthy, inventive new kosher diet? 
Perhaps you'd like to try some Dover sole poached in Vermouth? Or a hearty 
sweet potato salad?

If so, then Bernie's wife, Ruth Madoff, has written the perfect book for you: 
"Great Chefs of America Cook Kosher: Over 175 Recipes from America's Greatest 
Restaurants."

Published in 1996, this tome is suddenly getting some dubious attention on 
Amazon.

Several online visitors have posted jibes along the lines of "cooking the 
books". One contributor has delivered a delicately barbed comment: "These 
recipes are probably quite good, given the fact that Ruth and Bernie Madoff 
were relative homebodies as billionaires go – even before he was placed under 
house arrest."

Ack-ack gun

I have a new favourite American politician. He is a balding, white-haired 
gentleman by the name of Gary Ackerman and he doesn't suffer fools gladly.

Ackerman, a Democratic congressman, represents the so-called "gold coast" on 
the north shore of Long Island where many of Bernard Madoff's once wealthy 
victims live. The 66-year-old congressional veteran let rip at financial 
regulators during a committee hearing this week.

"I want to know who is responsible for protecting the security investor 
because I want to tell that person, or those people, whose job it is, that they 
suck at it," Ackerman barked.

Two witnesses cowered before him – Steven Harbeck, chairman of the Securities 
Investor Protection Corporation, and David Kotz, inspector general of the 
securities and exchange commission.

Both blustered, evaded and waffled. The SIPC, said Harbeck, only gets involved 
once a brokerage has gone bust. While the SEC's inspector general is "still 
determining" what went wrong at the agency supposed to regulate the financial 
markets.

"This is worse than a nail in the coffin, this is a spike in the heart of the 
investment community that makes America run at a time when we can ill afford 
it," snapped Ackerman. "Confidence in the government and its agencies are at 
stake here."

Building up a full head of steam, Ackerman held up one of his constituents – a 
billionaire philanthropist – as an example: "One guy called me up with tears in 
his eyes. His wife's dying from cancer, his kid's got a debilitative disease. 
He's going to get through this somehow but what's going to happen to the 
hospital he promised $12bn to in his next contribution, the children's 
hospital?"
 