
The WikiLeaks <http://213.251.145.96/> US embassy cables revelations caused a 
world-wide sensation. But the story behind their publication turns out to be 
just as sensational too.

It transpires that the partnership between the WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> founder Julian Assange and The 
Guardian was anything but straightforward.

According to a Vanity Fair article by Sarah Ellison, 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/politics/features/2011/02/the-guardian-201102> there 
were rows, legal threats and a series of shocks before the newspaper was able 
to publish what she calls "one of the greatest journalistic scoops of the last 
30 years."

She has reconstructed a blow-by-blow account of the twists and turns of the 
strained relationship betweenThe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> - and other papers, including 
theNew York Times - and Assange.

He emerges as an enigmatic, erratic and high-handed individual whose changes 
of mind and mood bedevilled the process of publishing the documents.

Assange is now under police bail in Britain, facing extradition to Sweden for 
questioning about claims of sexual assault. But Ellison's report sticks only to 
his dealings with The Guardian.

She tells how The Guardian's Nick Davies and Ian Traynor made the original 
contact with Assange in June last year. From that sprang the first revelatory 
cache of military logs of the war in Afghanistan.

The Guardian, having brought the New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> on board, then got its first 
inkling of the difficulties it might have with Assange. Without consulting the 
paper, Assange arranged for Germany'sDer Spiegel to join the partnership.

It also became clear that there was a major difference between the ethos of 
the newspapers and that of WikiLeaks. While the papers' editors were not 
prepared to publish anything that might lead to reprisals, WikiLeaks was happy 
to allow the names of Afghan civilians to be posted on its website.

Assange did not favour redaction. Ellison quotes The Guardian's investigations 
editor,David Leigh, as saying:

"We were starting from: 'Here's a document. How much of it shall we print?' 
Whereas Julian's ideology was, 'I shall dump everything out and then you have 
to try and persuade me to cross a few things out.' We were coming at it from 
opposite poles."

By this time, WikiLeaks colleagues noted that Assange was "becoming 
increasingly autocratic and dismissive." So did The Guardian.

Just before publication of the Afghan logs, a furious Davies was shocked to 
discover that Assange had unilaterally given the database toChannel 4.

Next came the war logs relating to the war in Iraq, and Assange sprang yet 
another surprise on The Guardian by demanding that the Bureau of Investigative 
Journalism should have access to the material.

This meant a delay in publishing. Leigh agreed to that, but only if Assange 
would gave the paper another batch of documents - the so-called "package three" 
- which was the highly sensitive US embassy cables.

According to Leigh, Assange told him: "You can have package three tonight, but 
you have to give me a letter signed by the Guardian editor saying you won't 
publish package three until I say so." Assange got his letter

Meanwhile, there were continuing problems of WikiLeaks's refusal to redact as 
The Guardian started its Iraq war logs publication on 23 October amid what 
Ellison refers to as "a growing sense of unease among the media outlets, both 
with one another and with Assange."

The NY Times went so far as to publish a critical profile of Assange 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/24/world/24assange.html> in which it quoted his 
anonymous former colleagues as speaking of his "erratic and imperious 
behaviour, and a nearly delusional grandeur."

The Guardian then discovered that a former WikiLeaks volunteer had leaked 
"package three" to the freelance journalist, and freedom-of-information 
campaigner,Heather Brooke.

Leigh, having invited Brooke to join The Guardian team, realised that by 
obtaining the data from a source other than Assange, the paper was released 
from its promise to wait for Assange's green light to publish.

Leigh passed on the documents to Der Spiegel and the NY Times, and the three 
titles were poised to publish on 8 November. With seven days to go, Assange and 
his lawyer stormed into the office of Guardian editorAlan Rusbridger and 
threatened to sue.

Rusbridger, Leigh and executives from Der Spiegel then spent a marathon 
session with Assange, his lawyer and another WikiLeaks member,Kristin Hrafnsson
, before "an uneasy calm" was restored.

Ellison writes of that crucial meeting in detail: 

"Assange was pallid and sweaty, his thin frame racked by a cough that had been 
plaguing him for weeks. He was also angry, and his message was simple: he would 
sue the newspaper if it went ahead and published stories based on the quarter 
of a million documents that he had handed over to The Guardian just three 
months earlier...

"Rusbridger somehow kept all parties at the table — a process involving a 
great deal of coffee followed by a great deal of wine. Ultimately, he agreed to 
a further delay, allowing Assange time to bring in other media partners, this 
time France'sLe Monde and Spain's El País."

In the end, The Guardian and the other four papers were able to publish, thus 
sparking a hugely critical response from the US administration, which is 
seeking ways to prosecute Assange.

But, as we have seen, it had been a rocky road for The Guardian way before it 
faced up to that controversy. Ellison writes:

"When I asked Rusbridger if he had any regrets about the way his paper handled 
the cables or the way it worked with WikiLeaks, he said, "No," but his response 
was so tentative that it seemed to reveal how fragile the project was in his 
mind.

"I think given the complexity of it all, touch wood, as I speak at the moment, 
it is remarkable it has gone so well. Given all the tensions that were built 
into it, it would have been surprising to get out of it without some friction, 
but we negotiated it all quite well."

Source: Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/politics/features/2011/02/the-guardian-201102>
 