
“It is the duty of every father to write fairytales for his children,” 
pronouncedOscar Wilde <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>, while 
acknowledging that “the mind of the child is a great mystery”. Asked by his 
small son what he dreamed about, Wilde ran through a phantasmagoria of 
imaginary creatures: “dragons with gold and silver scales … eagles with eyes 
made of out diamonds”. When he asked his son the same question, Cyril 
responded: “Pigs.” It’s an anecdote that brilliantly illustrates why reading 
books with children is such unpredictable fun – and why I’ve chosen this 
fairytale collection to kick off a seasonal series of blogs about books to 
share.

According to Wilde’s younger boy, Vyvyan, father and sons were united in their 
love of one story in this book, The Selfish Giant, though the brothers were 
puzzled as to why it brought tears to Oscar’s eyes when he read it to them. But 
what of the four other tales, most of which are best known today through 
adaptations for opera and ballet?

The Happy Prince 
<http://www.openculture.com/2013/07/stephen_fry_reads_oscar_wildes_childrens_story_the_happy_prince.html>
 was published in 1888 when Cyril and Vyvyan were not quite three and two years 
old, and my guess is that it was written with only a theoretical idea of what 
children might like. The one story that seems purely childlike is The Selfish 
Giant, in which a giant plunges his garden into perpetual winter by building a 
high wall to keep children out: “‘My own garden is my own garden,’ said the 
Giant, ‘any one can understand that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but 
myself.’”

The giant’s defences are breached by a little boy who leads the children back 
into the garden, enabling it to bloom again and melting its owner’s heart, 
before disappearing without trace. He reappears at the end of the story, and of 
the giant’s life, as a christ figure, complete with stigmata, promising to lead 
him to “my garden, which is Paradise”.


As a child, this was one of the fairytales I loved best: the imagery is so 
vivid, the story so direct and redemptive. As an adult, I find the story 
simplistic and the symbolism troubling. The sudden swerve into Christian 
allegory shut me out of the giant’s garden, so that it’s only by sharing it 
with children (through one of the gorgeous picture book versions, illustrated by
Michael Foreman 
<http://images2.eruditetechnologies.com.au/original/978/014/050/9780140503838.jpg>
 orRitva Voutila 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/7b/f3/f4/7bf3f4dd90889e87b2833e1c490e43ca.jpg>
) that I can return to that uncomplicated sense of wonder.


But there are grown-up conversations to be had about the story, too, in the 
context of the original collection: how seriously did Wilde take its religious 
iconography? Is it possible that he just liked the melodrama of mortal wounding 
– whether involving a little boy’s hands, or the breast of a nightingale which 
(in The Nightingale and the Rose) impales itself on a thorn to dye white roses 
red for a lovelorn suitor?


Martyrdom features in all but one of the tales, but Wilde’s attitude to it is 
never straightforward. In The Nightingale and the Rose, the suitor’s beloved 
scorns the blood-drenched bouquet because another suitor has offered jewels. In 
the title story, the happy prince is an ornate statue, who begs a swallow to 
pluck the jewels from his eyes and the gold leaf from his body to provide for 
the starving of the great city. Both die for their pains, and are swept up to 
heaven by an angel. But even this nobility is undercut when the swallow slips 
the prince’s eye into the hand of a little match girl. “‘What a lovely bit of 
glass,’ cried the little girl, as she ran home, laughing.”


This sliver of ambivalence in The Happy Prince is nothing compared to that of 
The Devoted Friend, a painfully relentless tale of self-sacrifice in which “an 
honest little fellow named Hans” gives everything in his garden away to a smug 
miller in the name of friendship. The story is told by a linnet to a water-rat 
who fancies himself a critic, provoking a squabble as to whether or not it has 
a moral. Wilde surely intended his stuffy Victorian readers to continue the 
argument, taking mischievous pleasure in allowing the miller to get off scot 
free while getting in a dig at critics.


Good Omens by Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman - fun, with footnotes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/15/good-omens-by-terry-pratchett-and-neil-gaiman-fun-with-footnotes>
In another story, The Remarkable Rocket, a magnificently conceited firework is 
prevented by his vanity from fulfilling his destiny. “Whizz! Whizz! went the 
Catherine Wheel as she spun round and round. Boom! Boom! went the Roman Candle. 
Then the Squibs danced all over the place, and the Bengal Lights made 
everything look scarlet. ‘Goodbye,’ cried the Fire-balloon, as he soared away, 
dropping tiny blue sparks. Bang! Bang! answered the Crackers, who were enjoying 
themselves immensely. Everyone was a great success except the Remarkable 
Rocket. He was so damped with crying that he could not go off at all.”

Though in this case the rocket gets his comeuppance, he’s too vain to 
recognise it. In a typically Wildean twist, he fizzles out in a ditch convinced 
he is a sensation. In traditional fairytale terms the miller and the rocket 
might be reprehensible, but Wilde clearly takes pleasure in them: I have a 
sneaking suspicion that he simply found them more fun than do-gooders, a relief 
from the sentimental obligation of fairytales (his own included). But I have a 
friend who sees The Devoted Friend as a parable of capitalism squashing the 
artist, and another who regards The Selfish Rocket as a proto-psychoanalytic 
study. However you read them, they’re far too provocative and colourful to keep 
to yourself.

 