
Few ingredients turn out so marvellously delicious as rice cooked using the 
absorption method. Please excuse the cheffy, technical term, but it does best 
describe what is going on when you make one of the world’s most popular dishes, 
and a long-standing personal favourite: pilaf, or pulav, or palaw, or plov – 
there are as many variations as there are nations in south and west Asia, the 
Middle East, India, the Balkans and large swathes of Africa. One thing they all 
have in common, however, is a good broth. Locked in a pot with long-grain rice, 
the stock penetrates the grains and infuses them with just enough flavour and 
moisture to make a light, aromatic rice that goes with just about anything: 
meat, fish, vegetables, nuts, dried fruit or yoghurt.

Beef, apricot and almond pilaf

Serves four to six.

250g basmati rice
Salt
120g ghee (or clarified butter) 
1 large onion, peeled and thinly sliced
2 medium green peppers, pith and seeds removed, cut into 0.5cm strips
2 medium carrots, peeled and roughly grated
600g beef sirloin, fat removed and cut into 8cm-long x 1.5cm-thick strips
75g dried apricots, roughly chopped, soaked in boiling water for 30 minutes
50g currants
50g flaked almonds
¾ tsp ground cinnamon
¼ tsp ground cardamom
½ tsp whole black peppercorns
½ tsp chilli flakes
10 cloves
Rind of 1 orange shaved off in long, thin strips, plus 2 tbsp orange juice

Put the rice in a bowl, add cold water to cover, stir in a teaspoon and a half 
of salt, set aside for an hour, then drain and rinse. Fill a medium pan with 
water, add a teaspoon and a half of salt, and bring to a boil. Add the rice, 
boil for four minutes, then drain.

Put a large frying pan on a medium-high heat and add two tablespoons of ghee. 
Once melted, add the onions, peppers and a quarter-teaspoon of salt, fry for 12 
minutes, stirring from time to time, until the onion is caramelised and the 
pepper soft. Remove from the pan and set aside. Add another tablespoon of ghee 
and the carrot, cook for two minutes, stirring, just to soften, then remove 
from the pan and set aside.

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Turn up the heat under the frying pan 
and add a teaspoon of ghee. Once smoking hot, add a third of the beef and 
stir-fry for 90 seconds, to brown. Transfer to a plate, and repeat with the 
remaining meat.

Put the drained apricots in a small saucepan with three tablespoons of ghee, 
the currants, almonds, spices, orange rind and a quarter-teaspoon of salt. Fry 
on a medium heat for four to five minutes, stirring, until the nuts are 
golden-brown. Remove from the heat and add the orange juice.

With the remaining tablespoon of ghee, brush the inside of a 20cm ovenproof 
casserole dish (for which you have a lid). Spread half the carrots on the base, 
top with a third of the rice, and top that with half the onion mix and half the 
beef, spreading out each layer evenly. Repeat the layers, finishing with the 
last third of the rice. Pour over any beef juices, then make five little 
indentations in the top layer of rice. Push the fruit and nut mix into these, 
cover with a clean tea towel and then the lid (make sure the towel doesn’t 
stick out, otherwise it may catch light). Bake for 30-35 minutes, until the 
rice is light, fluffy and crisp around the edges. Serve at once.

Saffron pilaf with bread crust

My take on a dish in Vegetarian Dishes From The Middle East 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/vegetarian-dishes-from-the-middle-east.html>, 
by Arto der Haroutunain. Serves four to six.

30g unsalted butter, plus 50g melted unsalted butter
2 onions, peeled and finely sliced 
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground coriander
½ tsp ground cardamom
1 tsp organic vegetable stock powder
½ tsp saffron
250g basmati rice, well washed
1 egg
90g plain flour, plus extra for dusting
Salt and black pepper

For the salsa
1 large pomegranate, seeds removed
½ red onion, peeled and finely diced 
1 tbsp pomegranate molasses
1 tbsp white-wine vinegar
15g parsley leaves, roughly chopped
1 tbsp olive oil

Mix the salsa ingredients in a small bowl with an eighth of a teaspoon of salt 
and a good grind of pepper.

Put 30g butter in a medium frying pan on a medium-low heat. Once it starts to 
froth, fry the onions for 10-15 minutes, stirring frequently, until soft and 
caramelised. Add the cumin, coriander, cardamom and stock powder, fry for two 
to three minutes more, stirring once or twice, then take off the heat.

Fill a medium pan with water. Add a tablespoon of salt and the saffron, and 
bring to a boil. Add the rice, boil for five minutes, then tip into a sieve and 
leave to dry for 10 minutes.

Whisk the egg until frothy. Add half the flour and a pinch of salt, and stir 
to a smooth paste. Add the rest of the flour, then bring the dough together 
with your hands. Transfer to a lightly floured work surface and roll out to a 
20cm circle, to fit the base of a heavy-bottomed casserole (for which you have 
a lid). Brush the base of the casserole with melted butter, lay the dough on 
top and brush liberally with more butter.

Spread half the rice on top of the dough, then spoon over first the onion and 
then the remaining rice, spreading it out evenly. Pour the rest of the butter 
all over the top, cover with a clean tea towel and clap on the lid (make sure 
the towel doesn’t peek out, else it may burn). Cook on a low heat for 35-40 
minutes, until the rice is light and fluffy and the pastry crisp and golden. To 
serve, spoon the rice on to plates, lift out the bread – it should be 
golden-brown on the base – and cut into eight wedges. Serve the pilaf with the 
bread and salsa alongside.

Aubergine pilaf cake
 Yotam Ottolenghi’s aubergine pilaf cake: ‘For those who want the wow factor 
without any pressure.’ Photograph: Johanna Parkin for the Guardian. Food 
styling: Katie Giovanni 
This Turkish dish takes a while to put together, but can be prepared well in 
advance. It’s one for those who want the wow factor without any pressure. 
Serves six.

40g currants
1 tbsp white-wine vinegar
2 tsp caster sugar
3 large aubergines, trimmed and cut lengthways into 1cm-thick slices 
Salt
300g baby spinach
About 100ml sunflower oil
40g unsalted butter
120g basmati rice, well rinsed
1 tsp ground cinnamon
1 tsp ground allspice
1½ tsp sumac
3½ tsp Aleppo chilli flakes (or 1 tsp regular chilli)
550ml chicken stock
30g pine nuts, toasted
250g cooked chicken leg meat (ie the meat from 3 legs), shredded 
200g natural yoghurt, to serve

In a small pan, combine the currants, vinegar, sugar and two tablespoons of 
water. Bring to a boil, stir to dissolve the sugar, remove from the heat and 
set aside for half an hour. Drain, discarding the liquid.

Put the aubergine in a colander, sprinkle with half a teaspoon of salt, and 
set aside for half an hour.

Fill a large saucepan with water and bring to a boil. Add the spinach, blanch 
for a minute, drain, refresh and drain again. Transfer to a clean tea towel and 
squeeze out as much water as you can.

Put a large saute pan (for which you have a lid) on a medium-high heat, add a 
tablespoon of oil. Pat dry the aubergine and fry – you will need to do this in 
batches – for four to five minutes, turning halfway, until cooked through and 
golden-brown. Set aside on a plate lined with kitchen paper while you fry the 
remaining aubergines.

Return the pan to a medium-high heat with 25g butter. Add the rice, cinnamon, 
allspice, sumac and two and a half teaspoons of chilli flakes. Add half a 
teaspoon of salt and saute for three to four minutes, stirring from time to 
time. Add the currants and stock, bring to a boil, then lower the heat to 
medium, cover and cook for 15 minutes, until the water is absorbed and the rice 
cooked. Remove from the heat, stir in the pine nuts and cover with a clean tea 
towel. Replace the lid and set aside.

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Fan all but four slices of aubergine 
around the base and sides of a 20cm-wide, round ovenproof dish (or a cake tin 
with a removable base), overlapping them slightly and leaving 1-2cm hanging 
over the sides of the dish. Cover the aubergine base with the shredded chicken, 
top that with spinach, followed by the rice. Use your hands to pack it in 
tightly, then lay the last aubergine slices on top. Draw in the overhanging 
slices, so the rice is sealed in.

Bake for 20 minutes, leave to sit for five minutes, then invert on to a plate. 
To serve, melt the remaining butter in a small saucepan on a medium heat. When 
it starts to sizzle, add the remaining teaspoon of chilli flakes, cook for a 
minute, then brush liberally over the cake. Cut into slices and serve warm, 
with yoghurt spooned alongside.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com> in London.

Follow Yotam on Twitter <http://twitter.com/ottolenghi>.
 