
So yes, it was Lauren B, after all. It has been Lauren B all along. It was 
love at first sight with her. And at the end of it all, at the last scene of 
the season finale ofThe Bachelor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-bachelor>, there she was. Then 
there she was wearing her big Neil Lane engagement ring, with a staircase of 
diamonds running up both sides, so big she could almost climb it.

Lauren B, the flight attendant who flies the friendly skies, has been the 
obvious winner all along. Ben Higgins’ only misgiving about Lauren B is that 
it’s all been too easy. But I have a feeling that Ben played football in high 
school in Warsaw, Indiana, without breaking a sweat. Ben likes easy.

And that is never going to change. 


Ben and Lauren are like the strikingly attractive couple in the street scene 
in the middle of Annie Hall <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G2eT3GS3ls0>, who 
are happy because, as the woman explains, “I’m very shallow and empty and I 
have no ideas and I have nothing interesting to say.”


Annie Hall: the best comedy film of all time
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/annie-hall-comedy> 
Alvy Singer is stunned: he is completely crushed. He believes that sitting 
through The Sorrow and the Pity is not just good for him, but also leads to 
happiness. He was thinking the same thing as he worked his way through 
Kierkegaard and Freud. The truth all along is that happiness belongs to those 
who don’t think too much. Vapid people have better lives.

This is good news, because most people are so superficial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/02/elizabeth-wurtzel-recaps-the-bachelor-season-20-episode-5>
 they wouldn’t even pass for powdered sugar. Very few people can explain 
themselves. Very few people can engage in a controversial conversation. Very 
few people can answer a difficult question. But no one wants to be caught being 
shallow. Definitely not Ben Higgins. And like everyone else, he is hiding in 
plain sight.

Ben spent a lot of this season of The Bachelor telling women that he wanted to 
know what was below the surface – that was pretty much how he put it. But it 
takes time to get to know someone. So instead, they had conversations about 
past relationships, and the emotions discussed were not deep at all. Somehow, 
none of the women ever had a fresh perspective on love and neither did Ben.

No wonder his favorite at the end of it all was Lauren B, who did not try to 
complicate matters with him. She never had to. Their first date, they agreed, 
felt like the first date you go on with someone you are going to marry.

What did they talk about? I remember she told him how her father loved to do 
yard work. What does it matter what they talked about? They spent a good part 
of the day drinking champagne in a hot tub overlooking the Pacific. That is 
better than being deep.

Unmarried people seem to think a lot of things matter in a spouse that do not. 
Which is why they aren’t married. When they realize those things are not 
important they will find someone. That’s how it works. And that’s why we are 
mystified by the choices people make. Just because something is good does not 
mean it is good for everybody.

On The Bachelor last night, for about an hour the show dangled the possibility 
that Ben was going to end up withJojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/mar/01/the-bachelor-season-20-episode-9-recap>
 after all. This seemed unlikely, because Ben had such a persistent thing for 
Lauren B. But maybe he was realizing that Jojo is great, since she is smarter 
and more emotional and more fun.


But that was a decoy. It was good one, too.

For a while there, they had me believing that Ben was going to depart from 
script and end up with Jojo. But why would he do that? This is a tough one for 
complicated people to get, but The Bachelor is a show about people who are not 
playing games. They are authentic. They believe in love. They believe in 
fairytales.

Ben’s parents really do believe he is hard on himself, as if – as if it is 
possible for a very good-looking man who sells software in Denver to be too 
hard on himself. This was a season about people who have not thought through 
their situation in worldly terms at all. They don’t know what they sound like 
outside church on Sunday – and who else is judging them anyway?

So Ben could do something to make his life more exciting, but why? Jojo would 
be a challenge, but that is just so much trouble. Men like that if they are not 
interested in getting married, but if they mean it about the wedding thing, 
they don’t want drama. No roses from old lovers at the doorstep.

And now Jojo is the star of the next season of The Bachelorette. She was an 
interesting contestant, but she might be something else on the other side. All 
of us are surprisingly multifarious.

When Ben was one of the guys on Kaitlyn’s season of The Bachelorette, he was 
lovely: he was sincere, and he tried harder than anyone else, and he seemed 
like a good guy who could change a tire on the side of the road, but who would 
also have an encyclopedic knowledge of alternative music.

He was obviously going to be the next Bachelor. And then he was boring. 
Oh well. Now he belongs to Lauren B. He’s her problem. Onward. 

 