
What’s the name of this show? The Family

When does it premiere? It premieres Thursday, 3 March, at 9pm EST on ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc>.

Wait, does that mean ABC cancelled Scandal? No, the network is just trying to 
trick us into watching it by letting it fill Olivia Pope’s pumps for a week. On 
Sunday, 6 March, it settles into it’s regular time slot at 9pm EST.

Phew. With a name like The Family, this show could be about absolutely 
anything.True. It’s a thriller about a boy who returns home after being 
kidnapped 10 years earlier and presumed dead. Someone was even convicted of his 
murder, and it sounds an awful lot like the documentaryThe Imposter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/23/the-imposter-review>.

The Imposter – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/23/the-imposter-review> 
Didn’t see that one coming. What’s happens in the premiere? Claire Warren 
(Joan Allen) is the Republican mayor of Red Pines, Maine, who was elected on a 
family values platform. Her daughter Willa (Allison Pill) is her chief of 
staff, her son Danny (Zach Gilford) is the town drunk, and her distant husband 
John (Rupert Graves) is an author who writes books about the grieving process. 
On the eve of her announcement of her intention to run for governor, her son 
Adam (Liam James) shows up at the police station after being presumed dead. His 
convicted killer, Hank Asher (former brat packer Andrew McCarthy), is released 
from prison and Nina Meyer (Margot Bingham) – the cop who fingered him – is 
determined to find out what really happened to the boy. Oh, and Nina has been 
having an affair with Adam’s father John for the better part of a decade.

I’m intrigued. What happened to the boy? He was kidnapped by a man and held in 
a room in the woods, but we don’t know how he got there or the particulars of 
his escape. He’s so traumatized that he barely speaks and likes to sleep in the 
closet because he needs to be able to touch the walls for comfort. There is so 
much different about Adam, in fact, that his brother Danny doesn’t believe that 
it’s actually him. He thinks it’s an imposter who has manufactured his memories 
using clues around the house, like an 18-year-old Kaiser Soze. Each episode is 
packed with flashbacks so we learn more about the original investigation as we 
learn more about the after-effects.

This seems like one of those shows where everyone has secrets. Who has secrets?
 Everyone. John and Nina have their secret affair. Willa, the daughter, who was 
supposed to be watching Adam, has a big secret too, probably having to do with 
fingering Hank for Adam’s murder. Hank, who moves back in across the street 
from the Warrens, is actually apedophile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/01/what-should-we-do-about-paedophiles>
 though he seems innocent of Adam’s disappearance. Claire seems secret-free, 
but she’s a GOP politician, it’s probably only a matter of time.

With a kid surviving years of abuse and returning to the family, it sounds 
like recent Oscar nominee Room.You would expect that, but not really. The cast 
is excellent (well, except for McCarthy who transmits his character’s oddness 
with a blank-faced stare) but creator Jenna Bans, formerly of Desperate 
Housewives and Scandal, seems more interested in untangling the mysteries 
around Adam’s disappearance than depicting a psychological profile of the 
effects of abuse and losing a family member.Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/room-review-telluride> did that 
expertly, but The Family is pulpier.

Is it any good? The strange thing about The Family is that, given the set-up, 
it’s incredibly generic. It feels like so many of ABC’s other twisty shows 
(Scandal, Quantico, How to Get Away with Murder, the late Revenge) and doesn’t 
really find a way to differentiate itself. It lacks the pathos and atmosphere 
of something like The Killing, the supernatural mystery of A&E’s The Returned, 
or the grief porn of The Leftovers, all shows that also examine what happens to 
people when they’re struck by loss.

The mystery, however, is incredibly intriguing. It’s obvious that something 
happened to Adam (or the boy claiming to be Adam) but just what and whether 
it’s true is almost enough to compel you to keep watching. But the action is so 
bland and the results so predictable – Willa obviously lied about seeing Hank 
and that’s the big secret she’s holding – that it’s almost not worth it to find 
out the answers.

Also there is a strange air of unbelievability to the show. It doesn’t have to 
do with Adam’s disappearance, but everything else. Claire, the mayor of a small 
town, has a huge press conference. For what? How are there 30 members of the 
press in Maine? There’s also a dogged reporter (Floriana Lima) working on a 
story about the case who works at a local newspaper with a large and thriving 
bullpen. Again, in rural Maine? No way. The scale of the importance of 
everything just seems way off the charts.

Is there anything good about the show? It’s obvious that Bans is a 
professional who has worked on two of the best shows in recent history. The 
economy of storytelling is absolutely astounding. She conveys what happened to 
Adam, the consequences to his family and everyone involved in the 
investigation, and where the family is now before the first commercial break. 
It’s astounding how quick and precise it is. The pacing doesn’t move at a 
breakneck speed like Scandal (if anything, the reveals come a bit too slow) but 
Bans is great at packing a lot of exposition into a short time span.

What’s the worst thing about it? I can’t stand the way it’s filmed. The camera 
angles always seem too low and too close. When two characters are having a 
conversation, the shoulder of one of them always takes up half the frame. It’s 
meant to look like we’re eavesdropping on something private, but it just makes 
me uncomfortable, like when someone sits in front of you in an empty movie 
theater.

I also worry about the sustainability of the show. The premise sounds like 
enough for a great movie. (I can see the pitch now, “Like Room, but a 
thriller!”). But the layers of intrigue don’t seem deep enough to keep this 
show interesting after one season and the straining it’s going to have to do 
for long-term viability are already bothering me.

Should I watch this show? No. Even with The Good Wife ending, there is still 
way too much television on Sunday night and The Family doesn’t do enough to 
justify its existence to make it worth your time.
 