
Right: first things first. No Franzen, no Rushdie, no Atwood. No wolves (Sarah 
Hall) or aliens (Michel Faber) or, for that matter, dragons (Kazuo Ishiguro). 
Now let’s move on: absentees preoccupy those who watch prize lists far more 
than those who make them, who need to silence the noise of industry hype, 
review coverage or previous renown. This year, the second in which the Man 
Booker prize has been open to American writers, the judges have certainly done 
that; after all, Harper Lee wasn’t on Wednesday’s longlist and a few weeks ago 
you’d have been forgiven for thinking no other book had ever been published 
(except forGrey, a few weeks before that).

Hanya Yanagihara: ‘I wanted everything turned up a little too high’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/hanya-yanagihara-i-wanted-everything-turned-up-a-little-too-high-interview-a-little-life>
This is a diverse and daring list, rich in the unknown quantities that thrill 
compulsive readers on the lookout for a new fix. Among its 13 novels – the 
“Booker dozen” – are Hanya Yanagihara’sA Little Life, a 734-page exploration of 
the effects of childhood sexual abuse that has, according to American reviewers 
and last Sunday’sObserver New Review interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/hanya-yanagihara-i-wanted-everything-turned-up-a-little-too-high-interview-a-little-life>
, left its readers simultaneously transfixed and devastated; Sunjeev Sahota’s
The Year of the Runaways, which depicts the hidden lives of migrant workers in 
Sheffield;Satin Island by Tom McCarthy, a dizzyingly complex mash-up of 
anthropology and corporate culture; and Marlon James’sA Brief History of Seven 
Killings, the first book by a Jamaican writer to appear on the prize’s 
longlist, which takes as its starting point the attempted assassination of Bob 
Marley.

There are more established names, too – Anne Tyler, Marilynne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/marilynne-robinson>, Andrew O’Hagan and Anne 
Enright – but none of these writers could count as “safe” choices. In each 
case, they seem to be interested in disrupting expectations, messing up their 
narratives a little: even Anne Tyler, whose novelA Spool of Blue Thread takes 
place in her traditional Baltimore setting and customary family set-up, inverts 
a linear narrative and plays fast and loose with her central characters’ fates 
and (big deal, this, in the modern world) likability.

Anne Tyler: ‘I am not a spiritual person’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/15/anne-tyler-interview-i-am-not-a-spiritual-person-spool-of-blue-thread>
Opinions differ, often sharply, on how much responsibility a prize jury bears 
for the breadth of its choices. My feeling is that to over-focus on a prize 
longlist, shortlist and eventual winner is to look in the wrong place. Panel 
members have a duty to think seriously about the limitations of their personal 
taste, of the literary traditions and voices they have grown up with; and if 
they’re not actively well disposed towards the new and unfamiliar, they 
shouldn’t be doing the job. But the real work of increasing the range of voices 
on offer starts a lot earlier, in the offices of agents, publishers, creative 
writing tutors and literary festival organisers.

My opening caveat about absentees notwithstanding, the book I’m saddest not to 
see here is Ishiguro’sThe Buried Giant, a phenomenally serious and risk-taking 
piece of work that kickstarted an important conversation about what literature 
could be, if only we’d chuck the reductive labels out. Thankfully, its author 
is unlikely to be deterred. That aside, my money’s tentatively on Yanagihara.
 