
Theatrical sound effects have become progressively more subtle and realistic 
through advances in recording and replay technology. However, those who go to 
the current show on the main stage of theRoyal Court theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-court-theatre> in London may well 
experience – if the night I went is any guide – a sequence of noises that have 
been relatively rarely heard since plays of the 1950s and 60s: a seat slamming 
against its back, preceded by mutters of objection or frustration and followed 
by protests from and apologies to fellow theatregoers.

The walkout – as standard a part of some productions in the middle of the 
previous century as a half-time choc ice – regularly punctuated the Royal Court 
performance I saw of The Mistress Contract, Abi Morgan's adaptation of an 
anonymously published memoir about a woman who agrees to provide a man with any 
sexual service he requires, in return for financial security and accommodation.

In recent decades, the early exit had declined as a theatrical phenomenon, 
largely because of a general reduction in social taboos and a vast increase in 
media preview material about upcoming productions. The decreasing number of 
people likely to be appalled by what they saw were more likely to be warned in 
advance. However, the return of banging seat-backs may have been encouraged by 
a recent directorial trend – plays without intervals – which deprives the 
offended of the option of leaving discreetly during the interval. Running 
uninterrupted for 95 minutes, The Mistress Contract poses exactly that dilemma.

And, although it probably wouldn't want to use this line in advertising, the 
Royal Court seems to be the focus of the revival in going home before the end. 
Prior to its current production, the show I saw that lost the greatest 
proportion of its audience while in progress wasMartin Crimp's In the Republic 
of Happiness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/13/republic-of-happiness-review>, 
staged 15 months ago in another interval-less production, which asked the 
audience to stay in place for 110 minutes. On that night, I sensed a fury and 
bemusement in some theatregoers that matched written accounts of the reducing 
number of viewers during the first runs of such radical dramas as Beckett's 
Waiting for Godot, Osborne's Look Back in Anger and Pinter's The Birthday 
Party, each of which bewildered British audiences with either form or content 
between 1955 and 1958.

And the evidence of In The Republic of Happiness and The Mistress Contract 
suggests that the two most likely causes of walkouts remain unchanged seven 
decades later: sex and structure. The major bursts of empty-chairing during 
Morgan's play occurred during two lengthy discussions between the characters 
about the methods and sensations of fellatio. And in the Crimp, the harrumphing 
exodus centred on the middle section of the drama, which dispensed with the 
usual conventions of dialogue to the extent that the actors delivered a series 
of non-sequiturs in an order they decided between themselves on the night.

Many will find it surprising that modernism remains so annoying to some people 
and also that oral exchanges about oral sex can still bring people to their 
feet in a theatre. And a particular oddity of these responses is that Crimp is 
well-known for his idiosyncratic approach to theatrical conventions (dating 
back to the structurally radicalAttempts on Her Life in 1997 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/attempts-on-her-life>), while 
Morgan's adaptation had been extensively advertised as concerning a sexual 
relationship.

The decision to walk out must also reflect a considerable level of frustration 
or boredom, as it is not an easy manoeuvre to accomplish. Mid-drama departures 
are discourteous to actors – although they presumably learn to tune them out, 
with one telling me that they are best thought of as a premature standing 
ovation – and inconvenient for fellow theatregoers, especially in venues with 
long, narrow lines of seating. One of the early leavers at my performance of 
The Mistress Contract had a central seat and also required the assistance of a 
stick to walk, which made her gesture of an exit into a mini-playlet of its 
own, complete with noises off of pain and irritation from at least eight 
neighbours on the side she chose to go.

Even so, none of these Royal Court leave-takings was the most dramatic 
spectator exit from a drama that I've seen. At a preview ofMichael Frayn's 
Copenhagen <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/1999/feb/10/theatre.artsfeatures> 
at the National Theatre in 1998, one theatregoer suddenly stood up, said "I 
object", and left, although the playwright – when I asked him about this in an 
interview – said that he had never discovered what the objection was. And as 
Copenhagen is a play about atomic physics, with an elegant but unthreatening 
structure and containing no sex, it can't have been for either of the Royal 
Court reasons.

• Mistress Contract – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/06/mistress-contract-royal-court-review>
• Abi Morgan: 'Mistresses have great power' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/28/playwright-abi-morgan-mistresses-great-power>
 