
Oh dear! The Independent <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> 
has undergone yet another major redesign - its fifth in five years - and the 
result, finally unveiled today, is less than compelling.

The editor, Amol Rajan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amol-rajan>, had 
prepared readers for this "brave new chapter" in the Indy's story with a couple 
of breathlessly enthusiastic articles in a five-day build-up to the change.

So we knew that the masthead would run vertically. It is certainly a bold 
innovation - common in university newspapers and "alternative" magazines but 
never used by a major national title before.

It shouts: "Look at us, aren't we radical and different!" But why do it? Rajan,
in his letter to readers on Saturday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/press/classic-with-a-twist-newlook-independent-is-on-the-way-8918338.html?origin=internalSearch>
, explained that it helped "create the feeling of a broadsheet in compact form" 
and he thought it "beautiful and elegant".

But I fear it is one of those gimmicks that will lose its appeal rather 
quickly. Looking through the rest of today's issue, it is clear that the point 
of the exercise is aimed at finding a way of transforming a small paper into a 
large one.

Nothing wrong with that, of course. It is further proof of the difficulties 
serious newspapers have faced ever since giving up on the broadsheet format. 
How do they maintain the patina of quality with restricted quantity?

This revamped Independent is seeking to overcome the quart-in-a-pint-bottle 
problem by floating lengthy articles in oceans of white space. That's also a 
bold move, making the paper look more like a monthly literary magazine than a 
newspaper.

But, after leafing backwards and forwards through the paper, I think it 
worked. So I applaud them for the effort. It does place the Indy apart from its 
rivals, underlining its commitment to essay-writing as distinct from news 
busy-ness.

I was critical of The Times for placing its editorials on page 2 under its 
past editor,James Harding <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesharding>, and 
was relieved to see his successor, John Witherow, put them back where they 
belong.

So I think the Indy is wrong to follow the Times's flawed decision. Leading 
articles in serious papers just don't work so early in the book.

I note the cartoon will go on page 3 in future, so Rajan is obviously 
determined to reinforce the idea of the Indy being a reactive paper of analysis 
and comment by turning the early pages into commentaries.

But the dispersal of the old "voices" section robs the paper of a natural 
"heart", one of its previous successes.

Nor am I convinced by the transformation of the features section, after an 
opening three-page essay, into what Rajan calls "short, sharp observations on 
the issues dominating the news agenda."

I like the changed fonts - they are clean and readable - and the restrained 
size of the headlines is a natural consequence of trying to gain extra space 
for the text.

It will settle down and evolve, as happens with all redesigns. Some of the 
radicalism will be softened. But will it win over new readers and retain the 
current audience?

Rajan, in his address to readers today, writes: "There’s an old saying in 
Fleet Street about journalists loving redesigns and readers hating them."

I tend to think they are baffled by them. In the Indy's case, the poor readers 
have been subjected to so many changes of direction that as soon as they get 
comfortable with one design, another comes along to distract them.

That is a further danger of this revamp. But the Independent's owner, Evgeny 
Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, in an article 
adjacent to Rajan's, describes the paper as having "a proud record of 
innovation", suggesting that change is, of itself, a good thing. (Perhaps he is 
a secret fan of Trotsky's concept of "permanent revolution").

He writes: "This redesign revives the elegance and sophistication of the 
paper’s first editions [after launch in 1986]. The strength of The Independent 
derives from its name, and consequent ethos."

But the name and ethos has not stopped the paper's sales from falling away at 
a dramatic rate over the past five years. It is sobering to reflect that in 
September, the Indy sold 69,388 copies a day across the UK, and that only 
46,260 of those were sold at the full rate.

That is the true measure of the challenge facing Lebedev and Rajan. In that 
sense, this redesign probably can't hurt the paper. But it is also fair to say, 
considering today's issue, that it looks unlikely to revive its fortunes.
 