
Asma al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asma-al-assad> looks poised 
and fragrant as she ladles food out of a vast silvery bowl to children who wait 
patiently for their portion. The first lady of Syria is dressed down for the 
occasion in a pale blue blouse, caught in an ethereal white light as she tends 
to the needs of her people. The woman is a saint.

In another photograph she sits on the ground with girls in Guide-like 
uniforms, and in another, she gives a little girl a new doll. She chats and 
smiles with grateful (and perhaps nervous) recipients of her bounty, in 
touchy-feely pictures that show her physically touching the poor and disabled.

These are some of the images from the daily rounds of the wife of president 
Bashar al-Assad that are puzzling a world riven by debate about claims that
Assad used sarin gas in an attack on his people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/05/sarin-syrian-chemical-weapons-cameron>
 in the suburbs of Damascus on 21 August. While the Syrian regime's 
responsibilty for the attack is disputed by Russia, China, Ed Miliband and many 
more who refuse to accept US accusations at face value, reactions to these 
photographs have been pretty much a universal "ugh". FromIsrael's Haaretz 
<http://www.haaretz.com/news/features/.premium-1.545149> to Britain's Daily 
Mail, the bland, Hello-like images of Asma al-Assad posing with little 
conviction as a friend of the people while her husband's civil war with rebels 
is devastating the country seem to strike most observers as "shameless" and 
grotesque.
 'A glittering triumph of banality' … Asma al-Assad pictured with Syrian 
children on the presidency's offical Instagram account 
The smiling, sun-kissed world of the Assads – while she does charity work, he 
holds decorous meetings with dignitaries – come fromthe Syrian presidency's 
Instagram account <http://instagram.com/syrianpresidency#>. The hugely popular 
photography site and app allows users to display and share pictures in a 
visually seductive way. You can see the temptation for Assad to use this benign 
tool for propaganda. But his Instagram smilorama appears to be backfiring: 
while argument rages over his alleged use of poison gas, his Instagram is 
drawing sneers. Perhaps the UN could even agree to condemn its bad taste.

It's no laughing matter. In a curious way, these pictures of Asma al-Assad 
reveal the truth aboutSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. Their 
blatant phoney quality – the first lady serving hot lunches while in reality 
Assad's forces have been accused of targeting bakeries, and refugees are 
streaming hungry for the borders – allows us to recognise the embattled Syrian 
regime for what it is. They stir a sinister sense of recognition, for who has 
not heard of the banality of evil?

The war in Syria has been made easier for Bashar al-Assad by powerfully 
enforced reporting restrictions.The death of the renowned war reporter Marie 
Colvin <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/22/marie-colvin> in Homs in 
February 2012 sent out a powerful message (it is unclear whether she and the 
other reporters killed or injured with her were deliberately targeted) about 
how hard it would be to get the truth from this killing zone. Many images of 
horror have come out of Syria since, but have to be examined carefully. Was a 
video that surfaced on YouTube early in the war, in which the cameraman 
observes a sniper at work until he is shot himself as the gun turns on him, an 
authentic piece of citizen reporting?

Reality has proved easy to destroy in Syria. Facts are hard to come by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middle-east-live/2012/nov/30/syria-internet-blackout-live>
 and have to be peered at through a bloody fog. The old adage that truth is the 
first casualty of war has never been more brutally proven – because Bashar 
al-Assad attacked truth from the start. As the civil war – we called it a 
rebellion then – started in 2011, he simply banned most foreign journalists 
from Syria. This is such a familiar fact it may seem obtuse to restate it. Yet 
it is no coincidence that two years into the conflict, international onlookers 
are debating fundamental issues of fact and evidence, with many people giving 
Assad the benefit of the doubt on last month's chemical attack.

Amid this uneasy global debate, Assad's Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> comes as a luminous portrait 
of the ruler, his marriage and lifestyle. It is a glittering triumph of 
banality. The Assads really seem to believe that they are the perfect couple, 
the dashing man of power and his beautiful and gracious first lady.
 'Dictators don't just fool the people. They fool themselves first' … 
President Al-Assad greets a welcoming public in a picture from his Instagram 
account 
It's too simplistic to describe these images as "propaganda". Propaganda for 
whom? Can the regime really think pictures of Asma al-Assad meeting the people 
will efface dead bodies, blasted cities and homeless children? It can only 
appear monstrous to outsiders to see this myth of a sanitised Syria promoted by 
a government at war with a large part of its own people.

Yet the Syrian president must think the pictures have purchase, that he can 
smile his way to success – and this can only be because he and his supporters 
drug themselves with such images. Dictators don't just fool the people. They 
fool themselves first. Dictators' private lives are often kitsch fantasy worlds 
that enable a ruler to believe in a myth that is then projected outwards and 
buttressed by violence. The Assad Instagram world of glossy magazine glamour is 
just another such self-empowering fantasy.

It has something in common with the photo albums found when Libyans stormed 
Muammar Gaddafi's family compound.Pictures of the dictator and his children 
posing with pet camels mingled with Gaddafi's pictures of Condoleezza Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/aug/25/libyan-gaddafi-mansions-in-pictures?intcmp=239>
. These albums – like the desert-disco decor of the Gaddafi residences – were 
not intended for public consumption. They were not "propaganda". The dictator 
himself liked to look at images of his private life that strengthened his sense 
of identity.

Adolf Hitler <https://www.theguardian.com/world/adolf-hitler>, similarly, 
worked on a private fantasy of who he was. He did not conduct his affair with 
Eva Braun in the public eye – her existence was a secret from most Germans. Yet 
plenty of photographs record their relationship and celebrate the leisure life 
of the Führer in Bavaria and Berlin. Braun and his dog feature heavily in these 
eerie pictures. Both appear to have been props in his own self-image. Hitler's 
real relationship with Braun is a mystery – observers said he was awkward in 
her company.

No one would doubt that the Assads have a "real" marriage – but what is real 
in the life of dictators? In the glory days of the Arab spring, the image of 
dictatorship as a corrupt, abusive form of rule was widely excoriated across 
the Middle East and in the west. It was easy for all parties to join in 
portraying Gaddafi as a tyrant reminiscent of Caligula or Nero. Today, so soon, 
disillusionment is such that even calling Assad a "dictator" may be seen as a 
caricature legitimating US aggression. But the Instagram says it all. Here is a 
ruler just as deluded as Gaddafi, just as intoxicated with his own myth. To 
live in this false world is the nature of absolute rulers.
 'Can the regime really think pictures of Asma al-Assad meeting the people 
will efface dead bodies, blasted cities and homeless children?' … Asma al-Assad 
on Syrian presidency's Instagram feed 
The ancient Romans knew that. Their historians describe with terse fury the 
madness of Tiberius, hiding from the public gaze at his villa on 
Capri among his young sex slaves, and Nero, setting fire to Rome to clear 
land for a new palace.

In the 20th century Hannah Arendt, witnessing the trial of Adolf Eichmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jun/10/adolf-eichmann-trial-issues-1960>
, one of the architects of the Holocaust, coined that phrase "the banality of 
evil" to describe the strange emptiness and unsatisfying lumpenness of 
history's criminals. Assad's Instagram world is supremely banal. Rather than a 
Nero fiddling while Rome burns or a Hitler dreaming of architectural follies in 
his last days in the bunker, the Syrian president in these pictures just wants 
to come across as a great guy with a lovely wife. But the space between these 
images and the stench of war is so manifest that it reveals a true dictator's 
loss of touch with reality.

The smiling fantasy of Assad's Instagram is blandly psychotic. It reveals a 
terrible gulf between reality and the ruler's fictional self-image. Banality 
may not be in itself a proof of evil. But in the psychology these pictures 
reveal, what lies are not possible? The mind that can believe in these pictures 
might easily order a war crime then go home to kiss his beloved wife.
 