
Roland Emmerich: literary detective. Not quite. But then Emmerich, the 
director of Godzilla, Independence Day, 2012 and The Day After Tomorrow, has 
never knowingly let the facts get in the way of a good story. And if the 
German-born director wants to position himself as an expert on Elizabethan 
drama now that he has a new film,Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anonymous>, based on the idea that 
Shakespeare didn't write the plays and poems attributed to him, who is to 
deny him?

Certainly not the English Speaking Union (ESU), which last week lined up a 
donnish cast to appear alongside Emmerich for a debate about the Shakespeare 
authorship question. The Mayfair HQ of the ESU has a rather academic 
shabby-chic that made it the perfect setting: the Shakespeareans get sprinkled 
with a little Hollywood stardust in exchange for the kudos of their scholarship.

Shakespeare authorship was a non-existent debate until the 19th century, when 
a few people started to question whether a grammar-school boy, such as 
Shakespeare, could possibly have had the classical education considered 
necessary to write such verse. First in the frame as the realWilliam Shakespeare
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare> was Sir Francis Bacon. When 
the facts proved inconvenient and Bacon had to be dropped, Christopher Marlowe 
became the prime suspect. He, too, eventually fell by the wayside – along with 
dozens of others – until in 1920, a schoolteacher came up with the idea that a 
minor Elizabethan poet, Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxford, had written 
Shakespeare's plays. His claims are still pursued by some today.

Naturally, Emmerich is drawn to the Oxfordians. Where's the story in the idea 
that William Shakespeare wrote Shakespeare? But an aristocrat who may or may 
have not had a love-child with Queen Elizabeth I and who died before at least 
10 of the plays were performed? Now that's a potential blockbuster.

Emmerich, at least, was at pains to downplay his Shakespearian credentials at 
the debate. "I first became interested in the subject in 2002 when I was 
working on The Day After Tomorrow," he said. "John Orloff brought me his 
screenplay based on the Shakespearean authorship question, and I felt it had 
possibilities. It was provocative, and there was a trove of unknown facts. So I 
started doing my own research on the internet and we collaborated on the 
final script."

As if acknowledging that this wasn't the strongest of intellectual bedrocks, 
he later added that "several of the actors who worked on the film [the cast 
includes David Thewlis, Rhys Ifans, Vanessa Redgrave, Mark Rylance and Derek 
Jacobi] have themselves had serious doubts whether Shakespeare wrote the plays."

What Emmerich lacks as a literary academic, he makes up for as a 
self-publicist. I'd guess that the man who directed Godzilla doesn't really 
care if Shakespeare wrote the plays or not. All that really matters to him is 
that there's the faintest possibility he didn't. The other speakers weren't 
quite so indifferent to the truth. His fellow anti-Stratfordians – Charles 
Beauclerk, president of the De Vere society, and Dr William Leahy – faced an 
uphill struggle. Beauclerk made an ineffective case for the Earl of Oxford 
based largely on an autobiographical reading of Hamlet, while Leahy could only, 
though in more sophisticated academic terms, repeat Emmerich's line that there 
are doubts about whether Shakespeare wrote all the plays. He didn't suggest 
another possible author, mind. Against them, scholars Professor Stanley Wells, 
Professor Michael Dobson and Rev Dr Paul Edmondson steamrollered the opposition 
with argument after argument in support of Shakespeare's authorship.

Given the event was more PR stunt than informed debate, it all got 
unnecessarily personal, with Dobson twice calling Emmerich a B-movie director. 
That's what you get for messing with a national treasure, I suppose.
 