
Mr Idiwi, a Fulani pastoralist, watches as a GPS robot draws a snaking white 
sand line on the dust track which winds through his Nigerian farmland. He looks 
surprised and then laughs. The drawing is an abstract visualisation of the 
farmer's daily migration patterns formed from Global Positioning data as the 
herdsman moves with his cattle between water, food and market places.

The scene I am watching is a clip from 'Nomadic Milk Project' a film 
documenting Ester Polak's innovative art and science project with Fulani 
herdsmen in Nigeria. I met Polak in Berlin earlier this year who told me, "Mr 
Idwi enjoyed seeing his own route. It made him emotional." Polak explained that 
she wanted to use the latest GPS technology to visualise the pastoralist 
journey, to tell a story that is often overlooked.

Pastoralists are travelling herdsmen who follow a seasonal migration pattern 
to find suitable land for their cattle to graze. Their daily journey is their 
story. In Africa about 40% of land mass is dedicated to pastoralism. But in the 
pursuit for development the pastoralist way of life has come under threat - by 
global warming, conflicts over land and changing government policy.

The plight of the nomadic herdsman is particularly virulent in East Africa. In 
Ethiopia major droughts are crippling herdsman who - used to adapting to 
changing conditions - are not able to keep up with the pace of contemporary 
climate change. Tadesse Dadi, Tearfund's Program Support Advisor in Ethiopia 
says, "We read about the threat to polar bears, or a rare plant species – and 
whilst these are important, we sometimes wonder if the poor farmers of Ethiopia 
are being forgotten."

Lacking good access to healthcare and education, pastoralists are hugely 
reliant on their animals. With heightened incidents of animal disease and 
severe drought through climate change, coupled with lack of access to 
education, many herdsmen are losing their livelihood, depending on NGO food aid 
in urbanised areas. Optimists believe that increased urbanisation will be good 
for pastoralists, creating an increased demand for livestock. But it hard to 
see beyond the more immediate factors of desertification, prolonged droughts 
and land restriction.

East African governments claim to support herdsmen but their policies are 
making it increasingly difficult for pastoralists to move across the land, 
privileging the rights of private farm owners and land investors. In 2006 the 
Tanzanian government authorised the ruthless eviction of Pastoralist 
communities from the Usangu basin in the Southern highlands of Tanzania, 
without offering them any other land to use. They have since admitted that it 
was a mistake but Tanzanian pastoralists continue to live without any policies 
to support their rights.

For many pastoralists, agro-pastoralism - the chance to farm in one place and 
learn new agricultural skills - is proving a positive source of livelihood and 
a way to adapt to changing climate conditions. But the growing number of 
pastoralists now farming in one place means that roaming pastoralists find it 
more difficult to move across land. There is increased competition for grazing 
spaces with reported incidents of herdsmen roaming into restricted national 
parkland. In Sudan-Kenya-Uganda there is the additional problem of pastoralist 
conflict between tribal groups, exacerbated by economic and political 
marginalisation and increased access to small-arms.

As drought becomes ever present in sub-Saharan Africa, governments seek vital 
funds for climate adaptation. Last year Oxfam published a report outlining the 
impact climate change is having on the people of Uganda, whose own contribution 
to the affects of global warming has been miniscule. The report detailed the 
effects of climate change on the country's infrastructure, highlighting the 
sustainability of pastoralism as a key concern. In order to implement the 
necessary adaptation measures Uganda is looking for 40 million dollars of 
international aid.

But economic support will have little affect if it does not go hand in hand 
with innovation. – something pastoralists have relied on for hundreds of years. 
A foot and mouth outbreak or a sudden change of weather require improvised 
migration. But the rapidity of climate and policy change means that traditional 
adaptation techniques are not enough. Whilst huge efforts have been going into 
agricultural innovation, particularly in Kenya and Ethiopia, few government 
resources have been concentrated on pastoralism.

According to Genet Jarso, representative of pastoral communities in Borana, 
Guji and Gabra, "Pastoralists have always been left on the margin of 
development. The general public and the decision makers who come from the 
farming communities often misconceive their production system, particularly 
mobility and flexible land use systems"

A recent innovation mapping by the Future Agricultures Consortium (FAC) 
suggests that indigenous knowledge of nomadic herdsmen has not been captured 
and shared widely enough and is often in conflict with government findings 
which are rarely 'in tune' with the pastoralist need to follow seasonal 
migration patterns. It argues that indigenous knowledge must be combined with 
scientific research into water access and communication models so that 
innovative solutions can be formed which draw on local, government and NGO 
findings.

According to FAC progress will be made when informal pastoralist innovation 
networks are brought together with those formally charged with researching and 
developing scientific and technological innovation policies. It is hoped this 
will successfully form networks and alliances which will counter the current 
communication gaps. As one Borana elder put it, "By combining we will find 
solutions more than we can now. We can then network amongst ourselves."

Last year Massai women in Kooja, Kenya, hosted a pastoralist gathering 
involving pastoralists from across Kenya and Ethiopia. They also met with 
government officials to discuss how to improve working relationships and 
accountablity. It showed how pastoralists could draw on their storng oral 
tradition to articulate debate and stimulate positive change.

The problems of pastoralism won't go away over night. African governments must 
work hard with pastoralist communities to resolve the growing problems of land 
conflict and climate impact. Gatherings like in Kooja are a positive step 
forward but there is a real urgency to the situation that must be acknowledged. 
As the latest communication systems mean nomadic tendancies become an 
ever-present characteristic of the globalised west it is imperative that 
technologies and resources are dedicated to developing systems of communication 
and adaptation that will sustain the livelihoods of millions of pastoralists 
across the African continent. Only then will pastoralism be a viable way of 
life for future generations.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 