
When he went, there were sniggers. I heard them on the radio, at the reading 
out of a newspaper cutting: "Dr Alex Comfort, author ofThe Joy of Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/healthmindandbody/9781845334291/the-joy-of-sex>
, has died – after a series of strokes." The laughter may not have surprised 
its object. In his last years in the nursing home before his death in 2000, 
Alex Comfort would ask interviewers to consider theenormous parade of books on 
his shelf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/search/results?query=%22Alex%20Comfort%22&searchBy=author>
:Authority and Delinquency; Art and Social Responsibility; Writings Against 
Power and Death; six novels and a handful of plays; volumes of poetry and 
travel writing; studies of political corruption, medical ethics, eastern 
philosophy; works on gerontology, on human evolution, on anarchism: a whole 
colony of Pelicans. "Unfortunately," he would say, indicating an illustrated 
coffee-table tome with the subtitle "A Gourmet Guide to Lovemaking", "people 
only know me for that one."

Comfort once contended that bloody-mindedness was the greatest human virtue. 
It was certainly the virtue by which he lived, and the reason he was able to 
pursue his parallel careers in literature and medicine. In 1935 he blew the 
fingers off his left hand while making fireworks to celebrate the Silver 
Jubilee of George V. His aunt, assuming that he would remain a lifelong 
invalid, wrote him a cheque for £50. His response was to go to South America 
and compose a travelogue calledThe Silver River. In the preface he wrote: "I do 
not believe the fable that men read travel books to escape from reality: they 
read to escape into it, from a crazy wonderland of armaments, cant, political 
speeches at once insincere and illiterate, propaganda, and social injustice 
which the lunacy of humanity has constructed over a period of years." When it 
was published, Alex Comfort was 18.

For the last few months, in preparation for a radio documentary, I've been 
talking to Comfort's friends and relations and reading through the immense body 
of work that now lies in the shadow ofThe Joy of Sex – the poetry that ensured 
he was spoken of in the same breath as Auden and Spender; the drama about the 
mine-workers forced to dig a toxic element that irradiates their bones and 
turns them into vengeful monsters; the pamphlets arguing that peace in the 
atomic age can only be secured through public disobedience. They reveal an 
extraordinary consistency in the great seven-decade span of his intellectual 
life. Comfort's mistrust of political and military power, his anarchist faith 
in personal responsibility, his sense of a more honest life that might be lived 
beyond the limits of convention – these flow fromThe Silver River to The Joy of 
Sex and beyond.

At school, he formed a peace corps in opposition to the army cadets. When war 
came, he registered as a conscientious objector. (Quite unnecessarily, as a 
left hand is required to operate a Bren gun.) During the war he risked public 
opprobrium and a ban by the BBC for condemning the men of Allied Bomber Command 
as "bloodthirsty fools" and suggesting that British pilots should stand trial 
for war crimes. In 1941, while still a student at Cambridge, he published a 
novel,No Such Liberty, which drew provocative parallels between Nazi Germany 
and the British wartime state. Comfort's account of the indignities of the 
British internment system was largely accurate – though thanking the Cologne 
branch of the Hitler Youth in the novel's acknowledgments probably didn't aid 
his argument. Nor did it endear him toGeorge Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>, who reviewed the book and 
declared its author "objectively pro-Fascist".

Comfort's views during the second world war were out of tune with their 
moment. In peacetime, however, they resonated with a new generation of radicals 
– though he was not at ease with all the mores of the 1960s. In 1961, he calmly 
went to jail for his part in the anti-nuclear protests organised by the 
Committee of 100. (A fellow inmate, the peace campaigner Michael Randle, told 
me that Comfort was surprisingly willing to take part in the square-bashing 
session that began each day.) Comfort's son, Nicholas, remembers his father 
driving off with a homemade radio transmitter, sound-proofed with glue-soaked 
Weetabix, to broadcast anti-nuclear propaganda to the factory workers building 
Blue Streak missiles in Stevenage. (The pirate station made the headlines when 
it bumped Kenneth Kendall off the BBC airwaves at Sunday teatime.)

Throughout the 1960s Comfort was a familiar face on television, booked to talk 
about the bomb, about the marginalisation of older people, about anarchism, 
about the alienating nature of modern life, and – increasingly – about the 
subject he would become identified with to the exclusion of all others. In 1963 
– the year, of course, that sexual intercourse began – he caused uproar by 
suggesting that "chivalrous" 15-year-old boys always went out with a condom in 
their pocket. Nine years later, and with some nervousness, he publishedThe Joy 
of Sex. It sold 12m copies.

Few authors are remembered on their own terms; some grow to hate the books for 
which they are most admired. There can be few whose life and work has suffered 
such a total eclipse as that experienced by Comfort. If he is recalled today, 
it is in association with that perennial 99p introductory offer on the back of 
the Sunday supplement, and that line-drawing of the couple with the straggly 
Woodstock hair. The true nature ofThe Joy of Sex, though, was one that few 
noticed at the time and few have remarked on since. It was a book about 
personal responsibility and freedom from convention; a book founded on the idea 
that political and erotic repression shared a common pathology.The Joy of Sex 
was the anarchist manifesto that conquered 1970s suburbia – a radical text that 
found a place on the shelves of millions of readers who didn't know Kropotkin 
from Kermit the Frog.

Late in life, Comfort regretted that he was no longer regarded as a poet; that 
his name had become uncoupled from those of his less-forgotten contemporaries. 
It was partly his own fault. In middle age he had neglected poetry in favour of 
lectures, essays and TV. In his final years, however, reduced to typing with 
the thumb of his blasted left hand, Comfort returned to stanza, metre, rhyme. 
The message, though, remained the same. It is legible in his fiction, in his 
political writings, in his willingness to go to jail for his beliefs, in the 
diagrams on the glossy pages ofThe Joy of Sex. Unfortunately for Comfort, we 
know the sentiment better from his rival,WH Auden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/whauden>. "We must love one another, or die."

• Matthew Sweet's Stop Calling Me Dr Sex 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01pd3nb> is on Radio 3 at 7.45pm on 30 
December.
 