
Nearly two centuries after Missouri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/missouri> gained statehood as part of a 
compromise over slave ownership, no black candidate has ever won a statewide 
election there – a barrier Robin Smith is trying to overcome but seldom 
discusses publicly.

According to an analysis by the Associated Press, Missouri is one of 10 states 
since Reconstruction where only white candidates have won contests for 
president, senator, governor and other nonjudicial offices elected statewide. 
The others are Alabama, Arkansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, 
Tennessee,West Virginia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/west-virginia>, 
Wyoming and Mississippi, which had the nation’s first two black senators in the 
1870s when those seats were chosen by legislators rather than popularly elected.

Just making it to the general election puts Smith, the Democratic candidate 
for secretary of state, in rare political company. The only previous black 
candidate to have won a major party’s nomination for statewide office in 
Missouri was Alan Wheat, a former Democratic congressman from Kansas City who 
lost the 1994 Senate race to John Ashcroft, the former Republican governor. 
Ashcroft’s son, Jay Ashcroft, now is running against Smith.

Black Americans on 'what they have to lose' if Trump becomes president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/03/trump-black-vote-detroit-speech-obama>
“Race never came up, so I brought it up,” Wheat said of his campaign. “I knew 
it was on people’s minds, and I wanted to openly discuss it so that any 
questions people had about it could be answered and satisfied.”

Smith, a longtime TV news reporter and anchor in St Louis, has taken a more 
reserved approach when addressing the topic. Although she spoke generally about 
making the political system more inclusive, she frequently changed the subject 
when asked about the historical ramifications of her campaign. Campaign manager 
Kirk Clay said she does not talk about race on the campaign trail either.

Smith and West Virginia auditor candidate Mary Ann Claytor are the only black 
candidates for statewide office who will appear on the ballot this November as 
major party nominees in the 10 states where no minority has ever won such a 
race. Four Native American candidates are running for statewide office in the 
Dakotas. All areDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>.

Statewide posts aren’t the only elected positions in which minority 
representation has lagged. An AP analysis published in June found non-Hispanic 
whites make up a little more than 60% of the US population but hold more than 
80% of all congressional and state legislative seats.

Mark Sawyer, director of the Center for the Study of Race, Ethnicity and 
Politics at UCLA, said progress for minorities on the statewide level has 
stalled since a wave of moderate, black officials was elected in the 1980s.

While statewide elected officials often climb the political ladder after first 
getting elected to local offices, Sawyer said white candidates are more likely 
than minorities to follow that pipeline. Minority candidates have enjoyed more 
success in local elections in areas with large numbers of black or Hispanic 
residents, he said, and those offices don’t always offer a clear transition to 
a statewide job.

Artur Davis, a black, former four-term congressman in Alabama, said race was a 
“continual factor” in his unsuccessful bid to win the Democratic nomination for 
governor in 2010. Davis said he considered it “coded” language when his 
opponent and others suggested he couldn’t win statewide inAlabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, where more than a quarter of the 
population is black.

“It’s very challenging to go from representing a primarily African-American 
district to a statewide environment in the south,” Davis said. “Once you become 
identified or tabbed politically as a spokesperson for a race, it obviously 
becomes very difficult to broaden your political appeal beyond that race.”

A black and Latino coalition is emerging – and that is a boon for Democrats | 
Barrett Holmes Pitner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/black-and-latino-coalition-vote-boon-for-democrats-clinton-2016>
Other hurdles cited by candidates, political scientists and other experts 
include the expense of running for office, minority candidates’ tendency to run 
as Democrats even in strongly Republican-leaning states and the lack of 
minorities in elected office who could help others break into politics.

Beyond the 10 states that have never elected a minority in a nonjudicial 
statewide race, six others had been included on the list before backing Barack 
Obama for president: Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania and 
Wisconsin.

There is no official list of minority officeholders or candidates because most 
states don’t track by race, and even the definition of minority can vary. For 
example,South Dakota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-dakota> 
previously elected two Lebanese-American candidates as US senators. The US 
Census Bureau currently classifies those of Middle East and North African 
descent as white rather than minorities, and the Senate’s website doesn’t 
include them on its list of minorities to serve in the chamber.

Of the states where voters have elected minority candidates to statewide 
office, several picked lieutenant governors who ran on a ticket with a white 
candidate. Kentucky only last year elected its first black candidate to 
statewide office. That was Republican Lieutenant Governor Jenean Hampton, who 
ran with Governor Matt Bevin.

Claytor, the auditor candidate in West Virginia, said there’s “probably always 
a chance” some voters might not pick her because of her race. But she said she 
was accepted while working in the auditor’s office and now is stressing that 
voters should choose based on candidates’ qualifications.

“Would you rather them have specific governmental accounting knowledge, or are 
you going to hold these things against them that has nothing to do with 
performing the job?” she said.

In 2008, Denise Juneau became the first American Indian woman in the nation 
elected to statewide office when she won her campaign for Montana 
superintendent of public instruction.

Juneau, who is now running for Montana’s lone US House seat, said the country 
has a long way to go before the minorities in public office are reflective of 
the population. But she said it’s important that minority candidates break 
barriers. At least in her case, Juneau said her success made the hurdle appear 
a little less daunting for others who might someday seek to follow in her 
footsteps.

“This is a game-changer about the perspective of what’s possible for their 
future,” she said.
 