
There is just over a month to go until “pension freedom day”, when people over 
the age of 55 will be given unfettered access to their retirement pots to spend 
as they wish.

Will long queues form outside Lamborghini dealerships across the country come 
6 April, as pensioners blow their savings on shiny sports cars? It’s unlikely.

Thousands of workers in their 60s will not be able to take advantage of the 
new rules, at least not initially, because of a lack of savings. More than one 
in 10 expects never to be able to retire fully, because they don’t have enough 
in their pensions, according to theScottish Widows 
<http://www.scottishwidows.co.uk/about_us/media_centre/reports_pensions.html> 
Retirement Report to be released next week. Indeed, the average pension pot 
used to buy an annuity is only about £36,000, according to the Association of 
British Insurers.

For those in the fortunate position of having more, there are dangers in 
blowing their pot in one go, amid growing fears that many do not understand the 
tax implications of making withdrawals, which could lead to unexpected tax 
bills from HM Revenue and Customs.

For the third article in our “pension bootcamp” series, we spoke to readers in 
their 60s. Some would like to stop working, but can’t afford to, while others 
could afford to stop working, but don’t want to.

The comfortable couple

Sydney Hill, 69, and his wife Bridie, 59, from Folkestone, Kent, have a series 
of final-salary pensions from previous jobs in the public and private sector, 
giving them a secure income.

They want to know:

• Can we access any of the money tied up in our final-salary schemes under the 
new rules?

• How much should Bridie take as a lump sum? 

• What is the best way to make financial gifts to our grandson?

Sydney is a retired design technology teacher and receives a final-salary 
pension worth about £12,000 a year. He also receives a final-salary pension 
from his previous job with the Dutch electronics company Philips, collecting 
£12,000 a year.

Matt Pitcher, executive partner at financial planner Towry, says: “He will not 
benefit from the pension changes because he is receiving income from his pots. 
They cannot be altered, even if he wanted to change the amounts.

“Once your final-salary pension is being paid, it is almost impossible to 
transfer to a defined-contribution pension [which enables the individual to 
access the new pension freedoms]. It is down to the scheme’s trustees but, 
broadly speaking, it is not allowed.

“Likewise, Bridie holds a valuable final-salary pension from the county 
council, and it would not be wise to transfer this into a personal pension 
plan. Transfer values offered by final-salary schemes in exchange for the 
pension rarely offer good value for money. Furthermore, this pension is 
index-linked in line with inflation so, to a large extent, it will be shielded 
from the effects of rising prices.”

Bridie has recently taken voluntary redundancy as a training manager for Kent 
county council and will leave in May after 19 years. As she turns 60 a month 
before that, she could start drawing on her pension. However, she is unsure 
whether to take the full lump sum of £68,200, leaving her an income of £10,300 
a year, or take a smaller lump sum of £28,300, ensuring she gets £13,600 a year.

She would like to take the maximum lump sum so she can put some aside for her 
grandson. But Pitcher says: “£40,000 extra tax-free cash may seem attractive 
against the background of the reduction in your pension as a trade-off, but it 
is not a good deal.”

The difference between the two offers is about £2,500 a year after tax, and 
replacing this gap in income would cost £55,000, based on the current market 
rate of about 5%.

Tom McPhail, head of retirement research at investment adviser Hargreaves 
Lansdown adds: “If she is in good health, she should expect to live for perhaps 
another 25 to 30 years in retirement, so that lump sum could prove to be a 
pretty poor deal. She could make gifts to her grandson out of surplus income, 
which could go into a trust.”

The low-paid workers


Simon Barnet, 60, and his wife Susan, 61, from Coventry, expect to be working 
for at least another five years, but potentially much longer.

They would like to know:

• How much income will we have in retirement?

• Should we buy an annuity, cash in our pots or do a combination of both?

• Will we be able to retire at 65?

Simon works as an IT administrator and has saved £41,000 into pension plans 
from his previous jobs. Susan works part-time for a local charity. The couple 
live in a rented house.

David Smith, director of financial planning at Tilney Bestinvest, says: “The 
first thing is to obtain state pension forecasts from the DWP, which will give 
you an indication of how much you will get. Assuming you have a full national 
insurance contribution record, it will be at least £7,716 a year.

“At retirement, you will have to decide what to do with your personal pension 
savings. You can still use it to provide an income, access ad hoc lump sums or 
even withdraw the whole amount. Your aim should be to ensure that you do not 
spend too much, too quickly and end up financially vulnerable.”

The bad news, says Pitcher, is how little their two private pension pots are 
worth if they buy an annuity: “They could provide a tax-free lump sum of 
£10,292 (25% of the fund) and an annuity paying just £1,471 annually.”

Both advisers say the couple should think twice before cashing in more than 
25% of the defined-contribution pots. They also suggest deferring taking their 
private and state pensions, possibly until the end of their 60s. This would 
enable Simon’s defined-contribution pot to grow further, allowing them to 
secure more of an income through an annuity.

Simon’s pension will be worth about £55,000 in five years, at 65, assuming 5% 
monthly contributions and 4% investment growth after charges, according to 
Tilney Bestinvest. Leaving it for another five years would allow the pot to 
grow, and deferring the state pension would give a larger income later on.

The grim reality is that they may need to work for several years beyond 65.

Pitcher says: “Ultimately, if you cannot bring yourselves to compromise your 
expenditure sufficiently in retirement to match your likely income, you may 
need to work longer to make the figures match. Either way, some additional 
homework is required before it is too late to make the decision.”

The pension millionaire 


Tom Butcher, 69, has a self-invested personal pension pot worth almost £1m 
after consolidating a number of private pensions accumulated during his career 
as a commodities trader. He lives with his with Sarah, 65, in Cambridgeshire.

He would like to know:

• How can I draw down on my Sipp and keep my tax bill low?

• Should I take a lump sum? I wasn’t planning to

• Is there anything else I should be aware of regarding the tax changes?

Tom is semi-retired but has not started drawing down his Sipp. He continues to 
work three days a week and tops up his income with the proceeds from the sale 
of his business five years ago. He has also deferred his state pension but 
plans to start taking it next month, and expects to start drawing down on his 
pension pot next year.

Patrick Connolly, a chartered financial planner at adviser Chase de Vere, 
says: “It is important you give serious thought to how you will take benefits 
from this. Making the wrong decision could leave him with a very large tax bill.

“The first 25% of the pension fund can be drawn tax free, and this can be 
taken over time, but the rest will be subject to tax at his marginal rate of 
income tax. This is where he needs to be careful.”

Pension pot withdrawals above 25% are added to your income for that tax year. 
If larger withdrawals are made in the same tax year, there is an increased 
likelihood that some of the money will be subject to higher-rate income tax at 
40%, or possibly even additional-rate tax at 45%.

Connolly adds: “If Tom withdrew his whole pension fund in one go, he could 
face a tax bill of about £450,000, reducing his fund from about £1m to about 
£550,000. He needs to manage how much he withdraws each year carefully, bearing 
in mind the likely tax implications.”

Taking the full 25% tax-free lump sum in one go “crystallises” the pension. 
But he could leave it “uncrystallised”, which means he can take 25% of each bit 
that he draws down tax free and pay tax on the remaining 75% – which is likely 
to be better than drawing down the lot and paying a huge bill.

Alan Higham, retirement director at Fidelity Worldwide Investment, recommends 
an annuity for at least part of his planning – but not until he is older. “As 
Tom moves through his 70s, he may wish to consider buying an annuity with some 
of his Sipp to give him a guaranteed income he can rely on to cover his 
essential expenses in later life.

“An annuity offers better value to older retirees than it does to younger 
ones, as well as taking away the risk of outliving your money.

“Having more secure income might make it easier for Tom and his wife to spend 
more of their savings to enjoy their retirement, rather than feeling they 
needed to keep money back.”
 