
Until this weekend, I innocently assumed that fashion designers drew their 
inspiration from the arty, the ethereal, the eternally wispy. Jean Seberg in a 
Breton top, perhaps, or Mick'n'Keef in Marrakech. Until, that is, I discovered 
Burton's new collection dedicated to Arthur Scargill.

Yes, really. Together with Royal College of Art student Liam Hodges, the 
menswear retailer has launched a line inspired by the former boss of the NUM. 
After watching documentaries about the miners' strikes, and scouring photos of 
colliery-chic, Hodges came up with 14 pieces, including a green donkey jacket, 
naturally enough (for, ahem, £180), and some rather natty bobble hats.

God knows what Barnsley's most famous Marxist makes of being the subject of a 
clothing range – let alone one flogged by Philip Green, who should have 
received his knighthood for services to the tax-avoidance industry. Still, 
intriguing possibilities arise of other figures from Labour's black-and-white 
past being resurrected by the Gods of Fast Fashion. How long can it be before 
we get an Eric Heffer fair isle pullover, or Sogat deck shoes? And just who 
would be able to resist the Mick McGahey pashmina slanket?

Yet something interesting is going on here, and it's summed up when Hodges 
defines the appeal of the miners' strike: "There's just something about a band 
of people sticking up for what's right. I suppose I'm slightly nostalgic." This 
from a 24-year-old Kent boy, born well after the Battle of Orgreave.

For the past couple of years, men's fashion has been full of such industrial 
wistfulness. Some of it is laughable, such as Marks & Spencer reporting a 75% 
jump in sales of flat caps; or Shoreditch web designers all togged up as if 
they have just emerged from a Seattle log cabin. But those excesses are 
outweighed by the sheer volume of fisherman's cagoules, brogues and tweed that 
dominates your average high street on a Saturday. The big chains have caught 
on: both John Lewis and M&S now stock "heritage" lines, sagging with twill 
trousers and heavy woollen cardigans.

I don't imagine any of the twenty- or thirtysomethings wearing this stuff 
seriously want to swap their service-sector lifestyles for the pit. "You 
couldn't see more than two yards for dust," as Scargill once reminisced about 
his early shifts to this paper. "I had to scrape the caked dust from my lips 
before I could eat my sandwiches."

But adopting the formula spouted by the Westminster classes for most of the 
past three decades – which simply states: manufacturing bad, services good, 
creative jobs best – doesn't do it either. For one, it overlooks the sheer 
employment created by industry: even in its current shrunken state, 
manufacturing still provides more full-time jobs than retail and finance put 
together. And it ignores the pay and job security that unionised workers in 
manufacturing secured for themselves.

Compare that with now. According to research by Howard Reed and Jacob Mohun 
Himmelweit in a new paper for the TUC, the proportion of this country's income 
that went to workers in the 90s and noughties was far below what they earned 
from the 1950s all the way to the early 80s of Scargill and co. And take a 
look, too, at the conditions now on offer to the children of those employees: 
endless internships, split shifts, outsourced and agency work.

As ordinary Britons have got less powerful and less well-remunerated, so they 
have been encouraged to think of themselves less as workers and more as 
consumers. They are "aspirers", in Blair-speak, the "squeezed middle" appealed 
to by Ed Miliband. Such phrases do not suggest that their audience is 
productive or that their labour is essential to the functioning of capitalism. 
And God forbid that they should be deserving of power. No, the voters are now 
merely a demographic. Compare that with Harold Wilson's Labour party, which 
promised a "fundamental and irreversible shift in the balance of power and 
wealth in favour of working people and their families".

You can see the same trend even in radical politics. "We are the 99%", that 
key phrase of the Occupy movement, appeals purely on the basis of demographics: 
the audience it seeks are those at the bottom of the modern-day pyramid scheme. 
To compare it with the Communist manifesto's rallying cry of "Workers of the 
world unite!" is to see exactly what is missing. Indeed, the last mainstream 
British politician to use Marx and Engels' slogan was George Osborne this 
autumn, as he launched his new scheme to encourage employees to give up their 
workplace rights for shares.

So the very identification of ourselves as workers is now a bad joke to be 
cracked at Tory party conference by an alumnus of St Paul's. We are instead 
shoppers with desires, or aspiring (for which read frustrated) shoppers, rather 
than producers with rights. We are supposed to gorge ourselves with expensive 
electronics assembled in China. As for industry, well that's something we keep 
in museums for weekend visits, or buy at vastly inflated prices from the high 
street.

Still, wait until you see my new range of Bob Crow flat caps.
 