
An average day in the occupation at Newcastle University 
<http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/local/tyneandwear/8706374.Protest_occupation_at_Newcastle_University_continues/>
 begins early. First on the agenda of each general meeting are a selection of 
messages of solidarity. We continue to be inundated with messages from local 
activists, teachers, parents, school students and academics, offering practical 
support and sharing advice from previous actions.

It was in such a meeting that we heard news of NUS president Aaron Porter's 
statement of support for the anti-cuts occupations 
<http://ucloccupation.wordpress.com/2010/11/28/aaron-porter-declares-support-for-all-student-occupations-agrees-to-ucl-occupations-proposals/>
 that are ongoing in many of the country's universities and look likely to 
grow. A ripple of polite applause crept across our lecture theatre but in 
general the mood was indifferent. Compared with the times we've received emails 
from prominent political activists, promises of "dinner for all" from our 
lecturers or words of congratulations from local people, it didn't seem to 
matter that much.

It is our occupation's atmosphere of radical, creative discussion and 
collective action that might explain why Porter'sapology for "dithering" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/nov/28/student-leader-apologises-over-dithering>
 in recent weeks fell a little flat. On the secondNational Day of Action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/blog/2010/nov/30/student-protests-live-coverage>
 today, and after six nights, our occupation is stronger than ever. Maintaining 
easy access in and out of the building has meant our space has been available 
for local sixth form and college students as well, providing a supportive 
environment for lecturers to have meetings about the cuts. We have organised 
our own daily educational programme, open to the public, as well as helping to 
allow scheduled classes to continue in our occupied space. Calls from local and 
national press are now almost as frequent as donations of food and blankets.

Another reason we were unmoved by Porter's statement was perhaps because his 
"U-turn" is a reflection of what we have experienced locally with our student 
representatives. They too have made new promises to support anti-cuts campaigns 
but we have learned through six days of successful occupation that this 
support, though welcome, is not vital. Like our sabbatical officers,Aaron Porter
 <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter> should support students 
engaged in peaceful direct action to defend their education. It remains to be 
seen how his statements to this effect will impact on those in the student 
movement he labels "unrepresentative" because they venture beyond the NUS 
blueprint for fighting cuts.

The action of occupying a university is not merely to challenge university 
managements to come out against cuts, nor is it only to put pressure on the 
coalition to stop talking misleadingly about "togetherness" when it comes to 
education reforms. Occupations are not just a political tactic that the NUS 
supports or does not. To occupy a university space is to fundamentally question 
what education is for, how teaching and learning is organised, whose decisions 
are acted upon and how those decisions are made. We are challenging 
relationships taken for granted and stimulating ideas for different ways of 
organising society.

Aaron Porter should join this collective effort to re-imagine education. But 
this must mean he accepts what will sometimes be a muddled conversation about 
the way we organise and protest: we are learning a lot of this as we go along. 
We have not forgotten Porter's initial statements following the protests at 
Millbank. His condemning of "violence", without distinguishing between people 
and windows, felt like a lazy dismissal of radicalism full stop. The student 
movement needs a fighting union which can be relied upon to support and educate 
its members about taking all actions against cuts. Porter's recent statements 
reflect his response to the strength of the growing grassroots student 
movement. This is an encouraging reflection of our collective political 
potential to suggest alternatives for education and necessarily perhaps for 
student representation.

This movement is bigger than Aaron Porter. It is bigger than the universities 
and bigger than the project of an occupied lecture theatre. In the north-east, 
the impetus for actions so far has come primarily from school and college 
students. This energy is in turn spreading across the wider community. This 
fightback will continue with or without Aaron Porter's support. It is simply 
too serious now to dwell for any length of time on what could be more empty 
promises. We are busy organising, occupying and reimagining what we want 
education to be. In short, we have got more pressing things to do.
 