
Britain is a Christian country, David Cameron has taken to asserting each 
Easter. In terms of sheer numbers, this is not true. There are more people who 
identify as something other than a Christian than whotick the box marked Jesus 
<https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/document/6v34wr1cpg/TimesResults_150209_atheism_Website.pdf>
. But the numbers are pretty tight – 51%:49% – and nobody likes a pedant.

More problematic than the fact that Cameron’s central premise is untrue is the 
surrounding text of these speeches, wedged with nonsense like expanding foam 
round dodgy plumbing. Trying to describe Christian values,he identifies 
<http://www.christian.org.uk/news/pm-bible-gives-us-values-and-morality-worth-standing-up-for/>
 “responsibility, hard work, charity, compassion and pride in working for the 
common good”. Look, I would love it if the world of religion genuinely offered 
choice, if there were a temple I could visit to worship fecklessness, 
selfishness and narcissism. But untilJames Delingpole 
<http://jamesdelingpole.com/> launches his own cult, that religion doesn’t 
exist.

All religions share the prime minister’s “Christian values”. Speaking as an 
atheist (since we don’t have a key text, any of us are allowed), we too share 
them. It’s so obvious thatCameron goes on 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35904018> to acknowledge it: “They are also 
values that speak to everyone in Britain – to people of every faith and none. 
And we must all stand together and defend them.”

Even in the era of the television soundbite, when all sentences in politics 
have been reduced to a length from which it would be unreasonable to expect a 
meaning, this does not work. Either these values are Christian, or they are 
universal. To assert a set of values as universal but mainly Christian is no 
more or less than an assertion thatChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> is the superior faith; not 
because its components are superior, but rather because Cameron says so.

Zac Goldsmith criticised over leaflet aimed at British Indians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/16/zac-goldsmith-leaflet-british-indians-heirlooms>
Having established by diktat that Christianity is more important than any 
other religion, the prime minister then sees it as self-evident that 
unbelievers and members of other faiths would want to stand together to defend 
it. It’s the sloppiness of the argument that’s really insulting. The casual 
Christian supremacy has no internal logic and no factual foundation; a serious 
Christian would feel as alienated and patronised by it as an atheist. But 
that’s no problem, since the Easter message is not really aimed at serious 
Christians.

Faith in political rhetoric is predominantly a proxy for ethnicity; if Cameron 
sounds confused and muddled, it’s because he’s finding it hard to say what he 
means. “You people, who are white and have lived here for generations, and have 
names like Edward that we can all spell and pronounce – you are this country; 
we should be able to stand up and declare our pride in you. We shouldn’t be 
intimidated by foreigners and critical thinkers. We should be able to clasp you 
by the shoulders and give you the lion-hearted hug of patriotic fellowship, 
which we’ll take care to disguise first in a threadbare cassock.”

Bogus arguments employing faith are often trussed up in nostalgic imagery. But 
in fact their roots aren’t in bucolic British yesteryear, these tactics are 
American-tinged and distinctively 21st century. The key concept is that we have 
passed through the era of political sophistication – in which deference died 
and people listened instead to arguments – and come out the other side. No 
points are awarded for complication, because most people aren’t listening. 
Likewise, there is no penalty for laziness or inconsistency or mendacity, as 
Boris Johnsonhas discovered to his delight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/eu-debate-boris-johnson-adopting-a-busking-and-humoresque-approach>
. In the pact of indolence between elected and electorate, people don’t keep 
tallies. It is far easier to vacuum up the vote of an entire “community”, via 
its “community leaders”, with coded messages about God, man and Mammon than it 
is to put forward anything of subtlety or substance.

Last week Zac Goldsmith illustrated this to even uglier effect than Cameron, 
whenhe produced a leaflet for his mayoral campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/16/zac-goldsmith-leaflet-british-indians-heirlooms>
 aimed at Indian voters, in which he said that their jewellery would be at risk 
under a Sadiq Khan mayoralty, since he supported a wealth tax on trinkets. A 
separate letter, signed by Cameron, featured a series of less incendiary but 
bizarrely unguarded meanderings, in which it declared Goldsmith and the prime 
minister as friends of the Punjabi and Sikh “community”.

Labour supporters have lit upon this as a dirty tricks campaign, but the 
insult to the Indian voter is so much greater: even the word “community” in 
this context assumes that, sharing an ethnicity, they must share one single 
volition. There is no room in this vision for you to be a leftwing Indian or a 
rightwing Indian. There is no need for you to worry your pretty head about 
anything except what is under your mattress.

Goldsmith’s leaflet offers an extremely primitive programme of materialism and 
fear, and seems distant – insultingly so – from Cameron’s appeal to Christians 
and their bedrock of profound values. Yet the methodology is the same: this is 
profiling not politics, voters wooed en bloc by faith, creed or race. 
Persuasion, coherence, consistency are all unnecessary in this terrain, since 
the people in it vote not with their minds but with their tribes.

This is why faith has no place in politics, and a prime minister has no place 
to tell us whether our country is or isn’t Christian. It is not because 
religion is civically irrelevant – it isn’t. Nor is it because politics has 
some superior rational grounding to religion – it often doesn’t. It is not even 
because atheists get a distinctly raw deal from such a political culture, even 
though we do. Rather, it is because, when politicians perceive us by creed or 
ethnicity, we become a different kind of entity for them. We are no longer 
their equals, who can think for ourselves but are open to persuasion, whose 
interests must be represented to the state. We are a congregation who, tickled 
the right way, will listen to our leader, since he is the state’s 
representative on Earth.
 