
Outside the farmhouse I take a last look at the stars. I have never seen them 
as sharp or profuse. I am joined by Pashka and Sofia, the two daughters of our 
host. They have brought in the animals and spent the past hour preparing for 
classes in the morning. They are still carrying their English exercise books 
under their arms.

I point at the sky. "Albanian word?" "Qiell," says 15-year-old Sofia. 

"Qiell," I repeat. I want to say how similar "qiell" sounds to the French. I 
want to say how different our "qiell" in Leeds will look when we get home after 
two extraordinary weeks in Thethi. Instead we all subside into laughter. The 
wonders and frustrations of the language barrier.

Pashka and Sofia have hardly attended the local school, which has been closed 
for much of the past few years. The class they will attend tomorrow is run by 
the 2008 pilot Thethi Summer Programme, and they, along with more than 60 other 
children from villages along the valley, are desperate to make the most of it.

We came to Thethi as volunteers on the project. Thethi is an ancient village 
in the northern alps of Albania. The literal translation of Shqiperi, the 
Albanians' name for their country, is "land of the eagles", and eagles, along 
with wolves and bears, still live in the Shala Valley. In summer the meadows 
are a mass of alpine flowers, but the valley is a tough place to live. Not for 
nothing are these limestone crags referred to as "accursed mountains" in 
winter, when the village is often cut off by snow.

My interest in Albania began with a play I was writing about the country's 
former dictator Enver Hoxha and his double. In the course of my research, I ran 
into an anthropologist called Antonia Young, who has long been fascinated by 
the country.

With her husband Nigel and colleagues in the region, she has been instrumental 
in setting up the Balkans Peace Park Project (B3P), a charity which aims to 
connect the adjoining mountain areas of Kosovo and Montenegro with the valleys 
of northern Albania, and the Thethi Summer Programme, which teaches local 
people basic English, is part of that project.

When Antonia told me that the village of Thethi needs tourists if it is to 
survive as a community, it was all the encouragement my wife and I needed. We 
agreed to sign up as volunteers on the pilot summer programme. Our two boys, 
Laurie, eight, and Owen, five, had had their quota of holidays in shallow, 
Spanish surf, so we told them we were going to do something different for a 
change.

And how different it turned out to be. The farm of Prek Harusha and his 
extended family was as far as you could get from shallow Spanish surf. Our 
journey began in Shköder, the regional capital of northern Albania where Rozafa 
Castle looks out from limestone crags across to Lake Shköder, and after a 
three-hour drive over the mountains in a minibus shared with 12 locals and four 
beehives, we arrived in Thethi.

After a delicious lunch of lamb, vegetables, yoghurt and honey, all produced 
on Prek's farm, we became aware of a small army of curious children waiting 
outside. Laurie picked up the football we'd bought in Shköder and went over to 
them. Three hours later, they were all still out there on the cracked concrete 
square that passed for the school playground - 20 dusty kids playing footie.

The programme ran for two months, with classes taught by foreign volunteers 
alongside paid Albanian translators. Accommodation with local families was 
arranged, and volunteers paid their own way. Though all volunteers had 
experience of teaching English as a second language, a qualification was not 
necessary. Some volunteers didn't teach but gave one-to-one conversation 
practice, ran games or music activities, or helped renovate local wooden 
bridges. Mary and I spent some time documenting the project for the B3P website.

We arrived in June, two weeks in, and the school was welcoming an increasing 
number of children every day. "You can see them walking in from up and down the 
valley," said Chris, one of the British teachers. "They're just so keen to 
learn." We spent our first morning writing a song about Thethi with the 
children, while our boys showed pictures of their school in Leeds. There were 
young people of all ages in the classes, which were conducted in English and 
Albanian, and our kids loved being part of it.

After lunch, the young Albanians returned to the fields while we were free to 
siesta or go for walks on the lower slopes where streams tumble through 
beechwoods and glades of wild strawberries. There are plenty of paths and 
guides of all ages willing to show you around.

One afternoon we walked up to a waterfall, past the still-working medieval 
mill, and cooled ourselves in the fine spray. Later, under the chestnut tree 
next to the church, there was volleyball and football. Each day closed back at 
Prek's farm with a glass of local raki or a cup of mountain tea made with dried 
oregano.

What did the programme achieve? It taught local children some English. And 
this is vital, for if they can't speak with foreigners, Thethians won't be able 
to host the tourists on whom their community's survival depends.

With great trekking and spectacular bio-diversity, the potential for tourism 
here is enormous. But opportunities are balanced by dangers. Many villagers 
still find the idea of charging guests unfamiliar and unfriendly, and the 
inexperience of local people leaves them open to exploitation. The hope is that 
organisations like the B3P can help Thethi develop at its own pace.

When it was time to leave we kissed Prek and his family goodbye and the 
minibus pulled away. Waving us off were all the friends our boys had made. In 
the distance, the last people we saw as we rounded the hairpin bend were Pashka 
and Sofia, still waving by the house. And when the programme reopens this June, 
they will be there, waiting for the school door to open.

Way to go

Getting there

British Airways (0844 493 0787, ba.com <http://ba.com>) flies from Gatwick to 
Tirana from £190 return including tax.

Volunteering 

Thethi Summer Programme runs 22 June-22 August and is recruiting teachers and 
other volunteers, preferably for a three-week commitment. Volunteers pay for 
board and lodging (€20 per night with a family) plus travel.

Further information

B3P: balkanspeacepark.org. <http://balkanspeacepark.org.>
 