
In The Blink Of An Eye: Media And Movement, Bradford

This is the kind of thing that Bradford's National Media Museum does best: 
setting up media studies exhibitions that are as captivating as they are 
historically informative. Most fascinating here are the displays that reveal 
ingenious ways in which movement was captured in the era before moving film was 
invented. Here, of course, are Eadweard Muybridge's late-19th-century 
stop-frame photo sequences that for the first time illustrated in magnificent 
detail how animals and semi-naked humans moved around. But here also are 
Victorian zoetrope optical toys and mutoscope ("What The Butler Saw") erotic 
teasings. Here too are a praxinoscope theatre and a phantascope lantern, and 
then – far more up-to-date – a CGI motion-capture suit. Then, beyond all this 
trickery, you come across Richard Billingham's stark, stunning photograph of a 
cat caught in mid-flight after being flung over the photographer's drunk dad's 
head, and your attention suddenly stops dead still on the perceptual surprise 
of a simple piece of great art.

National Media Museum <http://www.nationalmediamuseum.org.uk/>, to 2 Sep

Robert Clark

Gillian Wearing, London

Gillian Wearing's films and photography tap one of identity's central 
paradoxes: it's sometimes easier to be ourselves when we're in disguise. This 
survey of her confessional projects over the past two decades features a 
revealing cross-section of society's under-sung. The anxieties of teenagers are 
lip-synched by adult actors and people in the street write their true feelings 
on signs. Meanwhile, in an early work, Wearing herself dances in the midst of a 
Peckham shopping centre and later photographs see her dressing up as members of 
her family or creative inspirations such as Diane Arbus. It all adds up to a 
poignant study of selfhood in a reality TV age where the camera is our very 
public confessional box.

Whitechapel Gallery <http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/>, E1, Wed to 17 Jun

Skye Sherwin

Mirror Neurons, Sunderland

Just when one would suspect the National Glass Centre might run out of good 
art made from glass, it comes up with another exhibition that demonstrates the 
medium's enduring metaphorical potential. The title refers to scientific 
theories about understanding emotions by observing and mimicking. So the 
sensitively interactive art here depends on our own presence. A central 
installation is Catherine Richards's I Was Scared To Death/ I Could Have Died 
Of Joy, a glass replica of the brain and spinal column that responds to one's 
approach by pulsing with electromagnetic light signals of distress or elation.

National Glass Centre <http://www.nationalglasscentre.com/home.html>, to 20 May

RC

Brains: The Mind As Matter, London

Don't expect an enquiry into the elusive business of invisible thought and 
emotion from this show. It's all about brains as grey, squidgy, tangible 
matter, and what we've done over the centuries to probe them. This includes 
plenty of dodgy but fascinating apparatus, from phrenology models, sprung from 
the "anatomy is destiny" belief that a person's character depends on the shape 
of their head, to exquisite 17th-century maps of the brain locating essential 
landmarks such as the seat of the soul. No less wonderful or 
precarious-sounding are modern biology's attempts to navigate the brain, using 
jellyfish genes to make living cells fluoresce. This fishy theme is continued 
in one of the contemporary artworks featured in the show: Helen Pynor's 
Headache. This delicately gothic image of a brain afloat in a murky blue sea, 
entangled in black thread, suggests both the metaphorical sea of consciousness 
and the origins of life.

Wellcome Collection <http://www.wellcomecollection.org/>, NW1, Thu to 17 Jun

SS

Cerith Wyn Evans, Bexhill-on-Sea

In horror movies, flickering lights generally mean something supernatural. 
There's a similar fusion of language, electricity and yearning in Cerith Wyn 
Evans's art, not least in his chandeliers, flashing messages in Morse code. 
This haunting quality permeates all his work. Here he creates a love letter to 
the De La Warr Pavilion, removing gallery walls and revealing windows to flood 
the space with bright light. On the roof, firework flares spell out Jimi 
Hendrix lyrics. Meanwhile, giant columns throb with light and heat, mirroring 
the building's modernism as something hot and physical.

De La Warr Pavilion <http://www.dlwp.com/>, to 10 Jun

SS

William McKeown, Dublin

William McKeown has been sorely missed since his untimely death late last 
year. Here was an artist who reminded many of us of why we got into art in the 
first place: the pure thrill of opening one's first box of paints, the 
wide-eyed amazement at seeing an expanse of abstract colour taken so seriously 
in a gallery. His paintings, building up sensitivity from layers of resonant 
colour, are almost painfully uncomplicated. McKeown charms us into just 
looking, but it's an illuminating kind of looking. In his own words: "There are 
two types of art – open and closed. All closed art is negative and anti-life.Art
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> which is open is … expanding, 
positive and life-enhancing."

Kerlin Gallery <http://www.kerlin.ie/>, to 14 Apr

RC

Patrick Keiller, London

When it comes to humour, poetry and interrogation of our political landscape, 
no film-maker in Britain beats Patrick Keiller. Since the last Tory government, 
his fictionalised essay-documentaries have mixed shots of inner-city 
decrepitude and drab hinterlands with wry narration on economic failures, 
forgotten history, literary heroes and the peculiar English mind trap of 
nostalgia. All of which makes him a brilliant choice for the next Duveen 
galleries commission at Tate Britain.

Tate Britain <http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/>, SW1, Tue to 14 Oct

SS

Anthony Caro, Bakewell

This is the first show in the magnificent Capability Brown gardens to be 
dedicated to the work of a single artist, and features 15 sculptures created by
Anthony Caro <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro> over the past 40 
years. It is hard to imagine any other living sculptor who would not be cowed 
by the grandeur of the Emperor Fountain, around which the works are sited. 
Resplendent in varnished or rusted steel, or industrially spray-painted in 
blue, orange and green, Caro's monumental abstracts stand their own ground. 
Yet, despite their bold weightiness, there is an almost lyrical grace to these 
giant slabs of brute metal. "To please the eye and feed the soul … It's just a 
natural thing," is, after all, how Caro defines his creative agenda.

Chatsworth House <http://www.chatsworth.org/>, Wed to 1 Jul

RC
 