
Today at 10.25am our fight to save Farm Terrace allotments 
<http://savefarmterrace.wixsite.com/savefarmterrace> ended in defeat. It is a 
surreal experience to battle to save an allotment site for four years and then 
find outyou have lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/02/watford-allotment-campaigners-lose-high-court-battle-to-save-site>
 and there are no more avenues available.

I was down on Farm Terrace when I got the call. It has been my place of solace 
for the last eight years. I remember how excited my husband and I were to pick 
up the keys. I thought he was mad wanting an allotment when we had newborn 
baby. Within 18 months we were there with our second baby in a sling.

Our plot had a little gate with roses growing over it and a shed which had the 
previous tenant’s flat cap and overcoat inside. It was such an escape from the 
confines of the tiny yard of our terraced house. The children could run and 
play with the soil in their hands. We didn’t have much time to keep on top of 
it, but it became our routine, our congregating place and our refuge.

At the time, the site was about 90% occupied and although we didn’t know 
anybody else we started to recognise people and chat to our neighbours. Two 
years later we got the letter from Watford Borough Council saying that the 
allotment land might be needed for an expansion of the adjacent hospital.

We were devastated, but how could we argue? However it soon became clear that 
there was no hospital expansion and that the land was actually going to be used 
for flats. This got me angry - really, really angry. Not only for myself, 
although I admit the allotment was partly for my space to breathe. But now they 
were taking this place away from my family, from my kids. They were literally 
going to take my children’s playground away.

My six-year-old daughter asked me what we could do to stop it and I said 
“nothing”. As soon as I said it, I realised the effects these words would have 
on my daughter. That she could feel defenceless to this kind of bullying.

So after reading Cleve West’s book Our Plot 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/our-plot.html> I realised that to me, the 
council were stealing my community and the future community of Watford. Their 
shortsightedness for short term profit did not allow any compromise or 
inclusion of the allotments in their plans.

I was furious. Together with my fellow plot holders, we started the Farm 
Terrace Association and we slowly started taking on the council and in the end 
the government. We won twice but it felt as if the dice was loaded from the 
start: each time we celebrated a victory the goal posts were swiftly changed. 
We had not one but two days in court, and we brought the spirit of allotments 
to the high court each time.

Watford allotment campaigners lose high court battle to save site
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/02/watford-allotment-campaigners-lose-high-court-battle-to-save-site>
Today, I stood on the very land we have fought so long for and received the 
news that we had lost and an appeal was probably not going to work. I felt numb 
at first, and then shock and despair. This fight has never been for just us. 
This fight has always been about protecting other allotments and community 
spaces. Sadly with this decision, the courts have failed to define the 
exceptional circumstances required for councils to develop community spaces 
across the UK.

Growing together – an allotment picture essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2016/aug/15/growing-together-an-allotment-picture-essay>
I feel we have done our best, even though we lost this battle. We have been 
fighting for the survival of our allotment site and fighting for the protection 
of allotments up and down the country. By increasing awareness across the UK, 
we can hope the war will be won to protect community spaces. I am so proud of 
my supporters and fellow plot holders. But I also feel angry towards Watford 
council, who have used red herrings, such as suggesting we were standing in the 
way of a hospital expansion, to try to manipulate the public’s empathy. And I 
am angry at the government for allowing this to happen, for seemingly 
orchestrating it. And I am angry that I am bringing up my children in a society 
were immorality and greed wins above everything else.
 