 Accident or terrorist attack, the catastrophic crash of the American Airlines 
flight into Rockaway Beach, Queens, will leave New Yorkers feeling vulnerable 
and persecuted. Within minutes of the fireball hitting the suburb, friends in 
Manhattan were on the phone to me reporting black clouds of smoke as big as a 
weather system out in the west. Their calls were ahead of the television news 
stations and it is a measure of the alertness below the surface of each New 
Yorker these days that they were already working out possible targets, methods 
of attack and numbers of casualties.
They say the city was just about getting back to normal when this happened, 
but that is not quite true. The loss of life in one of the five boroughs two 
months and one day after the September attacks merely confirms to New Yorkers 
that they live in a new reality in which it is to be expected that planes swoop 
into buildings and plunge into residential areas. What will follow - the 
investigation, the funerals, the mass memorials and the news that friends of 
friends have been lost - is a matter of grim routine. Everyone will again be 
touched by disaster. The memories of the aftermath of the collapse of the twin 
towers, during which people had to get their heads round what they had seen and 
the news that friends and family members had been atomised, will be shockingly 
refreshed.

Within an hour of the crash, the bridges and tunnels to Manhattan had been 
closed; the UN had been evacuated; planes were diverted; and work had pretty 
much ground to a standstill. Again New York's defensive reaction was to cut 
itself off from the world and wait for what might come next. And it is in this 
not wholly sensible reflex that you see the city's sense of isolation, the 
feeling among New Yorkers that no one can possibly understand what they are 
going through this autumn. How can a quiet, well-to-do suburb such as Rockaway 
Beach - the idyll of American normality - be suddenly extinguished like this? 
And what of the 255 people on board the flight, many of them probably New 
Yorkers getting away from the city and a season of terrible news? How unfair 
can it get?

With miraculous speed, Mayor Giuliani appeared on television and gave the 
facts about a falling engine, a possible explosion and the numbers of people 
who were at the scene fighting the inferno. He ended his briefing with a 
reassurance which, after the twin towers and the anthrax attacks, seemed eerily 
well practised. "We must remain absolutely calm," he said. "We're just being 
tested one more time and we're going to pass that test again."

Whatever the results of the investigation, New Yorkers will leave no stones 
unturned in their own search for an explanation for yesterday's events. New 
York is a rational city, addicted to organisation, method and industry, but the 
people have a strong sense of fate, of supervening powers which can cast a 
person down or raise him to the very heights. This is the only city I know 
where clairvoyants and psychics advertise their services with neon signs.

The superstition that plays in the mind of the average New Yorker would be 
entirely recognisable to a person living in Athens during the fourth century 
BC. After the attacks on September 11, there were countless stories of how 
people had been saved by a simple twist of fate. Two that I heard involved a 
man who had decided to take his children to school for the first time and a 
woman who had been fired from her job and was asked to work out her notice on 
the 90th floor of the World Trade Centre from September 10. She decided to take 
a vacation instead because her boss had been less than caring when he sacked 
her.

Next week is Thanksgiving, the most important holiday in the American calendar 
because people celebrate their families and their success in the new world. 
This year it promised to be a relief for New Yorkers, many of whom come from 
out of town and had been planning to return home for the holiday. But it seems 
unlikely that they will be willing to take those once-crowded flights from La 
Guardia and JFK. They have seen too much in the way of broken fuselages and 
fires of burning aviation fuel.

They will stay put in their targeted city, and the reassurance of 
Thanksgiving, of home, of the backwoods quietness to which so many yearned to 
escape, will be deferred for a year. Getting on a plane looks like a suicidal 
act these days.
 