
'November, at least in Italy, is in my memory as foggy weather with mulled 
wine, chestnuts and truffles. There are still some sweet grapes hanging to dry 
and there is pork, obviously, because in the Mediterranean pigs are killed in 
the winter months.

I grew up in a rural area, the Aosta Valley, near the Swiss border, and every 
year there was a big feast celebrating the slaughter of the pigs. It's an 
extraordinary festival, and important, because the killing of a pig meant a 
year's food for a family. The tender part, the offal, was eaten immediately. In 
fact it was a wonderful gesture to present a little plate of liver to the 
neighbours as a gift. The rest was preserved as salamis, hams and so on. 
Everyone was charged with excitement and wine. I was fascinated by the sheer 
overwhelming moment when the pig was killed.

I remember one scene in war time. Papa was a railway station master and our 
large family lived in the station. With the help of some farmers around, we 
kept two pigs fed on our leftovers. One day the local partisans ordered that 
anyone who owned two pigs had to give away one of them to the cause. My father 
was incensed and he organised a butcher to kill the pig in the middle of the 
night, in the waiting room of the station. The next morning there was no trace 
of blood left. It was extraordinary. I will always remember the screaming of 
the pig. I loved that pig. You have a love affair with your animals that ends 
up in a useful form of tasty morsel. Every scrap was eaten, snout, ears, 
trotters - even the tail was used to flavour soup. Zampone (boned and stuffed 
pig's trotter) is the epitome of the entire killing of the pig. It's sold 
ready-made from good delis.

I've never understood the problem British people have with eating offal. They 
are fine eating kidneys, but that's about it. When I first came to London in 
1975 and noticed the way people cooked kidneys I couldn't understand the 
hypocrisy. I remember when I took over my Neal Street restaurant in 1980, 
people wanted kidneys grilled, underdone. No French, no Italian would dream of 
eating an underdone kidney because there is still pee in it! But the English 
wanted to savour that. In Italy and in France especially they want it very well 
done, they even cure them in milk to get rid of the urine smell. I would love 
to write a book about all the bits and pieces that people don't eat and bring 
clarity to the British public. In some good restaurants in Italy they serve 
entrails of milk-feeding lamb - still containing the milk - it's very rich and 
it is delightful. Eating offal is not about bravado, it's a completely 
wonderful flavour. In the south of Italy they cook testicles of foals and 
donkeys. I don't like them, but tasting it once is not bad. We can eat anything 
provided we are mentally prepared to think that it is good for us. Probably if 
man could, he'd eat himself.

Italian cooking in Britain has improved a lot in the last 20 years, although 
there are still misconceptions of lasagna and pizza. Italian food is very 
simple and the simplicity is obtained through the sheer quality of ingredients. 
In Britain they put too many ingredients in their 'Italian' food. Very basic 
flavouring should underline the goodness of the piece of meat and fish or 
whatever. There are so many restaurants opening, just jumping on the bandwagon, 
thinking Italian food is simple to cook. In fact nothing is more difficult than 
to cook simply. So many details - such as the amount of water to cook the pasta 
in - must be followed.

November in Britain is a little bit sad sometimes because it's usually full of 
rain and grey. I have my revenge going to the woods and because it's a time 
when the leaves are gone, I pick branches and carve them into walking sticks. I 
have a collection in the restaurant of about 40 on the wall. At home I've 
another 300 made from wood found all over the world. If it weren't for the fact 
that I can be in the country I couldn't live in the city. It would be too big a 
punishment.

Life should be enjoyed. I have a personal philosophy that procreation and 
eating are the most important things in life. One would be impossible without 
the other. The pleasure one gets from them is another thing because there are 
people eating just to sustain the body and there are people having sex just 
because they can. Others, like myself, get pleasure from both activities.' ofm

· To order a copy of Antonio Carluccio's An Invitation to Italian Cooking, for 
£22 plus p&p (rrp £25), call the Observer book service on 0870 066 7989. 
Published by Headline.

Stuffed pig's trotter with lentils

The stuffed pig's trotter or zampone is a speciality of Modena. The skin of 
the trotter is stuffed with a selection of minced meats, such as ear and cheek, 
and spices. The stuffed trotters sold by butchers in Italy require more than 2 
hours' cooking time, but you can buy specially packaged products which need to 
be cooked for only 20 minutes in boiling water. These are available in Italian 
delicatessens.

serves 4 

1 zampone weighing about 600g 

400g Castelluccio lentils 

a sprig of fresh rosemary 

4 sun-dried tomatoes, diced 

3 tbsp olive oil 

2 garlic cloves, sliced 

1 x 425g can peeled plum tomatoes, or polpa di pomodoro 

a good pinch of dried oregano 

salt and pepper to taste

Put the zampone in a large saucepan of boiling water and simmer for 20 minutes 
or as instructed on the packaging. In a separate saucepan, simmer the lentils 
in enough boiling water to cover, along with the rosemary and tomato dice, for 
15 minutes. Add a little more water if they have absorbed the first lot.

Meanwhile, in another large pan heat the olive oil and briefly fry the garlic. 
The moment it begins to change colour, add the peeled plum tomatoes. Roughly 
break them up as they fry in the pan. Cook over a medium heat for 10 minutes, 
reducing the tomatoes to a sauce. When the lentils are cooked, drain them well 
and add to the tomato sauce. Season with oregano, salt and pepper. Stir well 
and continue to cook gently for a further 10 minutes. Test the lentils 
occasionally: they should not be cooked to a mush, but retain a 'bite'.

Serve the zampone cut into slices 1cm thick, with the lentils and possibly 
some mostarda di Cremona.
 