
After the MOT testing centre said one of my tyres was looking dangerously 
worn, I headed to the local Kwik Fit. Which tyre should I buy? Kwik Fit offer
tyres from 18 different makers <http://www.kwik-fit.com/tyre-catalogue.asp>, 
from Goodyears and Dunlops through to Nankangs and Yokohamas. Goodyear alone 
offers 32 different types of tyre, Dunlop 34. In truth, I could have been sold 
anything as I don’t have a flipping clue which tyre is best. But at least I can 
look at, and feel, a tyre. How do you look at, and feel, a pension?

This is the problem now facing millions of people. The new pension freedoms 
means we are released from zero choice – you effectively had to buy an annuity 
– to a range of choices that for many will be completely bewildering.

What will we do? The evidence suggests that given too much choice we freeze 
and just do nothing. In an experiment in California, academics set up a jam 
tasting booth in a store. On some days they put out six kinds of jam, on others 
24. When six jams were on show, 30% of customers bought a jar; when 24 were 
out, only 3% did. “Jams are hardly complex things, but people saw 24 stacked 
together and thought: ‘I have no idea how to deal with this’,” said behavioural 
economist Dan Ariely.

George Osborne said in the budget a year ago that everyone would have access 
to independent advice on their pension choices. But within hours he 
backtracked, and the wording was changed from “advice” to “guidance”, as the 
government is terrified about being held responsible. So you will be told you 
have options, but not which is best.

Over the next few weeks Guardian Money will examine the ways in which you can 
invest your pension money most wisely.

In the past this column has highlighted the social impact the meteoric rise in 
buy-to-let has had on “generation rent”, now locked out of the property market. 
But, as my figures show, buy-to-let may work for some people, judged purely 
financially. And property, like tyres, can at least be seen, viewed and 
examined.

My email box is already filling up with schemes pushing buy-to-let for your 
pension: some half-decent, some completely bonkers. Young renters watch out – 
retiring baby boomers are about to pull up the ladder yet again.


 