
History is strewn with moments when politicians made swift decisions that led 
to disastrous consequences. One such moment has just occurred. In throwing out 
theActa <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta> (Anti-Counterfeiting 
Trade Agreement) bill on Wednesday, MEPs in the European parliament have 
unwittingly signed their countries up for a future in which internet piracy 
will lead to the decline of film, the novel, journalism and music on an 
industrial scale.

This is not scaremongering. One need only look at the stats from the US, where 
during the Clinton administration the internet companies were given free rein 
to pillage copyright material via the rushed-through Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA). According to Robert Levine, in his bookFree Ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/aug/18/free-ride-robert-levine-review>
, the music industry in the US has declined by over 55% in the last decade. 
Film is following with its first decline in recorded history. Journalism is 
heading towards "free". All because people now assume that "ripping" is the 
norm. If "aggregation" is OK, as the Huffington Post do it, then why should we 
pay for journalism? Why should we be branded pirates? This is what the European 
parliament has just ruled. Everything on the net, from now on, will be free.

As a journalist, novelist and a friend of many who "used to be" musicians, I 
see the wrong in this. I defend copyright because it is the lifeblood of the 
creative industries and of democracy. Other unexpected voices have joined the 
cause of copyright protection – Dr Dre claims there will be no future 
generations of rappers because of piracy and the expectation that recording 
artists will put their work out for free.

Modern consumers don't think of the next year – they are hooked on the 
short-term quick fix. They don't understand the negative impact of piracy. Over 
the last year, I've conducted surveys of the students I've lectured and 90-98% 
of them, between the ages of 18 and 32, are involved in daily acts of piracy. 
They no longer pay for music or films or journalism. They have a vague idea 
that what they do is left wing, that it has somehow to do with freedom of 
speech. And I say to them, but don't you want to make films, be journalists, 
make music? Where will the money come from if you don't pay? This is a blind 
generation. And there is no point trying to convince them person-to-person that 
what they are doing is damaging their own future.

The only solution is governmental. And the problem started with legislation: 
the DMCA, with Clinton, who was bullied into it by the tech companies in 
Silicone Valley. The ruling makes it impossible to sue internet providers for 
copyright infringement on their own sites. So for example, if I am a band, it 
will be my responsibility, or that of my record company, to trawl the tens of 
thousands of rips of my songs and send out writs and sue individuals. 
Meanwhile, the internet companies who profit from piracy are left scot-free, 
legally. According to Robert Levine, 75% of all material on YouTube is in 
breach of copyright. That's a $36bn company, with 75% of its content based on 
piracy. And don't forget that Google owns YouTube. Also, Google Adsense places 
advertisements on YouTube pages, and makes money from them, without any proper 
legal procedure to test whether such pages have been ripped. Google and YouTube 
also sell ads on pirated pages. And 99% of their income is based on selling 
ads. The internet is a vast succubus that preys on the content made by the 
creative industries. Ask yourself why it is that recent culture has ground to a 
halt.

There is nothing radical or hip about being a pirate. Those who think they are 
being counter-cultural by ripping content off the web are fools, and this 
includes those who fought against Acta in the name of "freedom of expression". 
They want the internet to be some kind of 60s utopia where everything and 
everyone is free. But we still live in capitalism, and if you make culture 
free, you make it a ghetto.

The internet is not free. It is about as free as the free market. And the 
companies that run the internet are all massive US corporations. When you rip 
material on the net, there is a cost. You are handing over you own country's 
cultural content to US corporations, who will never pay a penny in return.

After Acta has died, we must go back to US legislation and overturn the DMCA. 
Sites like YouTube would then be deprived of 75% of their illegal content. It 
won't be much fun – 75% less fun, but then maybe we will start to understand 
that we have to pay for culture.

• Follow @commentisfree <http://twitter.com/commentisfree> on Twitter
 