
Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou is adamant Tim Cahill remains part of his 
World Cup plans after omitting the veteran striker from this month’s away 
qualifier against Thailand.


Postecoglou dropped a bombshell on Wednesday by leaving Cahill out of his 
final 23-man squad over fitness issues. The 36-year-old Melbourne City marquee 
missed last weekend’s A-League win over Adelaide with Achilles soreness.

Jamie Maclaren stars as Brisbane build momentum with victory over Perth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/jamie-maclaren-stars-as-brisbane-build-momentum-with-victory-over-perth>
But while he is likely to return on Friday night against Brisbane, Postecoglou 
opted to leave Cahill inAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> to recover fully instead of 
the risk of putting him through an intense 10-day training camp before the 15 
November game in Bangkok.


It is the second time in 20 months an Achilles issue has forced him out of an 
international after also being sidelined for last March’s friendly with Germany.


With his 37th birthday fast approaching, Cahill’s exclusion has sparked 
questions about whether age is finally catching up with the talisman as he 
inches towards a fourth World Cup appearance.


Yet he has remained a key component of Postecoglou’s set-up, more recently 
used off the bench for limited periods but still consistently contributing to 
the scoresheet.


Postecoglou insists Australia’s all-time leading scorer need not worry his 
international career is in jeopardy, two goals short of 50 and six caps shy of 
a century.


“He is still very important for us,” Postecoglou said. “Timmy missed the last 
[A-League] game and had a bit of an interrupted pre-season. We took him along 
to the last camp and he got through most of the work but, for us, it’s more 
important he has a strong A-League season.”

The direct beneficiary is Brisbane striker Jamie Maclaren – not named in the 
extended 30-man squad but getting the nod ahead of Apo Giannou based on his 
strong club form.


Maclaren, debuting against England in June, is also playing regular football. 
Giannou, however, would be more than two weeks without a game having just 
finished the Chinese Super League season with Guangzhou R&F.


It was an important factor given the in-form Tomi Juric suffered a knock last 
weekend playing for FC Luzern.


“I didn’t want to be left short up front having two players in one position 
being underdone physically,” Postecoglou said. “Jamie missed out on the initial 
squad but I thought, against Central Coast and then him scoring [against 
Glory], he’s looked pretty good.”

Ryan McGowan and Chris Ikonomidis were also dropped from the team that drew 
last month with Saudi Arabia and Japan, with Nathan Burns, Josh Risdon and 
Milos Degenek elevated alongside Maclaren. Luke Brattan, Tommy Oar, Jason Geria 
and Aziz Behich were trimmed from the 30-man line-up.

The unbeaten Socceroos will start arriving in Bangkok this weekend for the 
match which signifies the halfway mark of the Socceroos’ final stage on the 
road to Russia 2018.


Having slid to second in Group B, two points behind Saudi Arabia, Australia 
can ill afford to slip up against last-placed Thailand on their mission to 
qualify as one of the top two in their six-team group.


The match will go ahead despite the recent death of the country’s beloved 
king, although supporters have been asked to treat it as a solemn occasion.

Australia: Nathan Burns, Milos Degenek, Adam Federici, Alex Gersbach, Craig 
Goodwin, Jackson Irvine, Mile Jedinak, James Jeggo, Tomi Juric, Robbie Kruse, 
Mitchell Langerak, Mathew Leckie, Massimo Luongo, Jamie Maclaren, Mark 
Milligan, Aaron Mooy, Josh Risdon, Tommy Rogic, Mathew Ryan, Trent Sainsbury, 
Brad Smith, Matthew Spiranovic, Bailey Wright.

 