
Tim Cahill came off the bench to deliver Australia a stunning smash-and-grab 
success overUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/unitedarabemirates> in their World Cup 
qualifier in Abu Dhabi. The striker’s second-half volley, his 48th goal for the 
Socceroos, produced a 1-0 win and maintained Australia’s winning record on 
their path to the 2018 tournament in Russia.

For more than an hour at Mohammed Bin Zayed Stadium, Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> toiled but threatened to come 
up short in oppressive conditions. Cahill changed that within four minutes of 
his arrival, timing his run into the box to volley home Brad Smith’s 
inch-perfect cross.

Barcelona’s Andrés Iniesta: ‘I was a victim of something that terrified me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/barcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it>
Coach Ange Postecoglou and the travelling coaching staff embraced despite the 
sticky weather, delighting at their well-executed plan. “We only needed him for 
20 minutes over these two games and he delivered,” Postecoglou said of Cahill.

“Smithy’s put in a great ball. Timmy must have them all on a retainer because 
it was the best ball of the night. We kept going until the end and got the goal 
we deserved and justifiably go away with three points.”

Cahill paid tribute to his team-mates who endured 90 minutes of pain in 
draining conditions. “I scored but it was because of the collective performance 
... if you ask me if I think I’m going to score when I go on the pitch, of 
course I do,” he said. “Everything the boss asked of us we did. We hung in 
there.”

Anything short of victory would have been an injustice for an Australian team 
which produced one of the performances of Postecoglou’s tenure. In front of an 
energetic crowd of 40,893 – including injured captain Mile Jedinak – the 
Socceroos dominated from the kick-off.

Robbie Kruse and Tom Rogic saw fierce first-half strikes saved, while Aaron 
Mooy menaced with both corner kicks and a direct free-kick that was headed 
over. But without a knockout punch, UAE remained in the contest.

Talented midfielder Omar Abdulrahman showed his ability to conjure something 
from nothing. Socceroo defenders were twice forced to make last-gasp clearances 
from Abdulrahman’s chipped balls, with Trent Sainsbury and Smith stopping 
one-on-one chances.

After the break Australia’s torment of the UAE goal continued. Mooy unleashed 
a half-volley onto the bar during a spell of utter dominance while at the other 
end, Ali Mabkhout spurned a mighty chance by volleying over from close range.

It would be a costly miss, with Cahill leaving his mark and Australia 
withstanding late pressure to claim a famous victory. The win puts Australia on 
top of their qualifying group after two of 10 matches, ahead of next month’s 
clashes with Saudi Arabia and Japan.
 