
An "industry" in one breath, a "profession" in the next. But, in judicial 
inquiries, parliamentary debates and committee hearings, it is always "the 
press". One noun covers all. Meanwhile, back at the ranch, Dickie Desmond is 
hating the "fat butcher" Dacre and everyone else is hating Dickie: theMail and 
theTelegraph are at daggers drawn, as usual: the Guardian is treated 
sorrowfully, as though it's burped in church; and Rupert is a pariah come to 
dust, unless he's paying your wages. In short, there seems to be no solidarity, 
no togetherness, no collective will. Just loathing.

Except in one changing regard, that is. Welcome to Newsworks 2012 
<http://www.newsworks.org.uk>, which used to be the Newspaper Marketing Agency 
in 2011. No Desmond, of course, and noFT – but the Guardian and the Sun 
standing side by side, theMail cuddling up with the Mirror, the Times and the 
Indy paying up to tell advertisers how well print – all print – can work for 
them. And now Newsworks adds an extra twist. Renamed and reinvigorated under a 
new director, Rufus Olins, it wants to show how "newsbrands", online as well as 
on paper, can do a bounding, buoyant job. Forget gloom or retrenchment. There 
are some terrific facts to hang onto here.

Is the audience for newsbrands going down (as everyone says) or up? Silly 
question. In 2007, print and digital news in Britain accounted for 22.6 million 
readers; now it's 24.4 million. Newsbrands (mainly in print) best reach people 
buying a car for more than £20,000, taking out private health insurance, rating 
ABC1. They tap the interests of 6 million more women a week than all women's 
magazines put together. Young people – between 18 and 34 – make up 25% of print 
readership (and possibly 37% of the digital audience). So brands, trusted and 
often historic brands, are splendid. They define whole sections of society – 
Guardian readers, Telegraph readers – and they're active, dynamic; not morose, 
not doomed.

Why, then, do journalists and pundits trudge around continually claiming that 
the end of their world is nigh? Because they don't understand? Because they 
don't believe in their own strength? Ah! there's the rub.

Take those 24.4 million readers. They're an "estimated figure", says 
Newsworks, since "no single survey measures all platforms in detail". You have 
to put together National Readership Survey, ABCe and TGI Net figures for 
readers who follow screens but never turn pages to validate the claim. It's a 
reasonable, well-argued bet. But, crucially, it is a bet: a complex calculation 
rather than a simple fact. And that's what's surprisingly stupid about 
newsworking the net.

In theory, it's an entirely mechanical process: advertisers ought to know 
exactly what they're getting, one click at a time. In practice, it's a melee of 
competing methodologies and claims (usually by analysis companies who say that 
only they add this or that dimension). Nine different research groups are 
thanked at the back of Newswork's first brochure. They may all be necessary; 
but they bring perplexity with them as their slideshows begin.

ABC in America has just done the seemingly strategic thing and fused print and 
digital results together. ABC in the UK has just split Saturday sales and 
weekday sales into two separate sets of statistics (and paved the way, one 
guesses, for day-by-day figures on print circulation, which can't sensibly be 
replicated for digital yet). But where's real transparency amid so much 
contradictory change? At the moment, the more advertisers are told, the more 
complicated everything gets.

There may be better progress after this autumn if, as rumoured, ABC in Britain 
begins to go the US route with consolidated figures. But those results still 
won't fit neatly with parallel findings from comScore or Nielsen, if present 
experience is any guide – while even the basic ABCe findings here are becoming 
an infuriating morass of inconsistency, sometimes giving daily figures, 
sometimes monthly, sometimes posting N/A in column after column. So Mail Online 
has 90,000,000 unique visitors; so the Guardian's April figures were up a 
staggering 61% year on year; so scratch around for the other information you 
need.

Of course, newspapers can do their own work and make their own pitches, but 
surely "the industry" has an interest in behaving like one – in this area at 
least. Olins's first exercise in togetherness shows just how much scope for 
positive selling there is (and perhaps how talking down print too glibly can be 
a huge mistake). Sniping helps nobody; ideological battles over paywalls and 
the like butter few parsnips in Mad Men world. But if Newsworks is going to 
work, it will need to achieve something in unity that only Leveson seems to 
think exists: to take a scatter of competing egos and grinding axes and make 
them an industry.
 