
October 2010 High voter turnout boosts hopes that this election will end the 
country's post-civil war division. Campaigning gets under way as thousands of 
troops are deployed across the country. Incumbent President Laurent Gbagbo and 
former prime ministerAlassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara> take just over a third of 
the vote each and move to a second round of polling.

November Voting takes place under a tense curfew, as the chief of the UN 
operation says he is "confident that the Ivorian people will surprise the world 
pleasantly with the runoff". However, the electoral commission is split, with 
Gbagbo's representatives physically restraining colleagues from announcing the 
result to journalists.

December The Constitutional Council names Gbagbo the winner, but the electoral 
commission names Ouattara who is immediately recognised by the UN, United 
States, and the EU. On 4 December, both Gbagbo and Ouattara are sworn in as 
president in separate ceremonies. Within a week, the Economic Community of West 
African States and the African Union suspendIvory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>. On 16 December, supporters of 
Ouattara in Abidjan are fired on by Gbagbo's forces as they march on a 
television station. Ouattara establishes a headquarters at a beachfront hotel 
under the protection of UN troops.

January As 2,000 extra UN troops arrive in the country, the United States 
freezes Laurent Gbagbo's assets. The UN says 247 people have died in the 
conflict so far.

February The EU extends sanctions against the Gbagbo regime as clashes 
continue in Abidjan. On 22 December, African Union representatives meet both 
Gbagbo and Ouattara amid an escalating violence in Abidjan.

March The AU confirms the legitimacy of Ouattara's election win. In the west, 
the Forces Nouvelles movement, loyal to Ouattara, makes military gains as the 
UN warns that half a million people have been displaced by fighting. In 
Nigeria, the Economic Community of West African States holds a conference on 
the Ivorian crisis.

April Burkina Faso's president, Blaise Compaore, meets Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> in an attempt to begin 
mediation in the conflict. On 5 April, the UN launches air attacks on Gbagbo's 
positions as Ouattara says he hopes to advance rapidly to end the fighting. 
Under the auspices of the UN, French helicopters attack Gbagbo's palace on 9 
April. On 11 April, a French source announces the arrest of Gbagbo by 
Ouattara's forces backed by UN and French forces.
 