
There's a great view of a huge blue Ikea superstore from the taxiways of 
Newark airport. I know every detail of this structure, having spent the whole 
of Tuesday afternoon gazing at it through the window of a stationary aircraft.
Heading down to Dallas to write about an environmental squabble at 
ExxonMobil's annual meeting, my packed Continental Airlines flight left the 
gate on time at 3.45pm.

It moved about 100 yards and parked in the middle of the airfield. Shortly 
before 8.30pm, it returned to the terminal without taking off.

"We appreciate your patience, folks," the captain repeated endlessly as 
rebellion fermented among the increasingly sweaty passengers (the air 
conditioning was fighting a losing battle with sunshine in the mid-eighties). 
"At least we're out in what I call the 'ball park', so we've just got to wait 
for clearance."

Sustenance for four-and-a-half hours comprised a cup of Coke and a tiny packet 
of peanuts. The crew refused to serve any alcoholic drinks - presumably for 
fear of drunken air rage outbreaks. Continental initially blamed heavy rain in 
Texas, then tornadoes in Pennsylvania and unspecified "summer weather" in New 
Jersey.

"We can't control the weather," said a surly gate agent back inside the 
terminal, where it soon became clear that the entire airport was in meltdown. 
True - but as an airline, you could design a timetable which doesn't 
disintegrate whenever there's a thunderstorm.

Flying in and out of the New York area has become an increasingly grim 
experience. The city's airports are chronically overstretched and it only takes 
a passing squall to create paralysis.

Three quarters of America's aviation delays derive from New York. In the three 
months to March, national punctuality was 71% - the worst for a decade - and the
figures for the Big Apple's JFK, Newark and LaGuardia 
<http://www.bts.gov/programs/airline_information/> were a dismal 70%, 59% and 
58% respectively . In Europe, by comparison, theEuropean Airlines' Association  
<http://files.aea.be/News/PR/Pr08-015.pdf>says punctuality is running at 80%.

The problem is becoming a political hot potato. Discontent has surged since 
Valentine's Day last year, when a storm crippled Kennedy airport and hundreds 
of people spent the most romantic day of the year stuck in immobile JetBlue 
planes for up to 10 hours. The airport didn't have enough stands available to 
get anybody off and Democrats in Congress demanded a passengers' bill of rights.

Part of the problem is that US airports have traditionally been a 
free-for-all. Airlines can schedule as many flights as they like at whatever 
time they see fit - irrespective of whether their timetables are realistic.

The US transport secretary, Mary Peters, this month proposed a move towards a 
British-style system <http://www.dot.gov/affairs/dot7108.htm>. She wants to 
introduce auctions in which carriers compete for a capped number of slots at 
New York's airports.
This wouldn't necessarily cut the total number of seats available - instead, 
it would encourage airlines to spread their services more evenly through the 
day as slots at peak morning and evening rush hours would become more expensive.

"The idea is that airlines should pay more to land at a particular time when 
capacity is limited and expansion is not possible," says Bijan Vasigh, managing 
director of the Florida-based Aviation Consulting Group.

The idea has received a resounding raspberry from the aviation industry. 
"These ill-conceived and unlawful proposals are driven by ideology and will 
not reduce congestion or flight delays," saysJames May, president of the Air 
Transport Association 
<http://www.airlines.org/news/releases/2008/news_05-16-08.htm>. "We must work 
to expand, not limit, capacity."

A Continental Airlines spokesman says the only way to solve congestion is to 
improve air traffic control technology: "We would like to see airspace able to 
handle more volume. The New York air travel market is going to continue to grow 
and the system needs to grow to cope with it."

It's pretty clear that the public aren't happy with the status quo. A survey 
of 26,000 travellers throughout the US by the University of Michigan 
<http://www.theacsi.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=180&Itemid=> 
found satisfaction at 62 out of 100 - barely above its record low of 61, 
reached in 2001.

Hammered by the sky-high oil price, most of America's airlines are losing 
money hand over first. Several carriers have held merger talks recently - Delta 
wants to combine with Northwest Airlines while United Airlines has negotiated 
with US Airways.

The world's biggest airline, American Airlines, turned in dreadful punctuality 
figures of 49%, 52% and 62% at LaGuardia, Newark and JFK in the first three 
months of this year. When barely half of flights are running at the advertised 
time, airlines are getting fairly close to selling tickets under false 
pretences.

Analysts say the present fuel price spike is a worse crisis in financial terms 
than the aftermath of September 11. A handful of carriers such as Hawaii's 
Aloha Airlines and Indiana's ATA, have ceased passenger services - as have the 
all-business transatlantic airlines Eos and MaxJet.

A shakeout is inevitable and, unless the government indulges in a bail-out, 
the chances are that more carriers will go to the wall. Based on the present 
contemptuous level of customer service, some of them don't deserve to stay in 
business.
 