
We love time travel because it is impossible. There is no scientific rationale 
for the idea that a human can travel forward or backward in time. Physicists 
like to dabble with the idea in the way stage magicians like to pretend they 
can actually make things disappear. But wormholes, faster-than-light travel or 
the folded geometries of space-time are about as likely to send me on a journey 
through time as Paul Daniels is to be voted most popular man in Britain.

But as The Time Traveler's Alamanac 
<http://headofzeus.com/books/The%20Time%20Traveller%E2%80%99s%20Almanac> aptly 
demonstrates, at the heart of every great science fiction story is an 
impossible idea. Editor Ann VanderMeer and her Igor-like assistant novelist 
Jeff VanderMeer bring together a veritable Frankenstein's monster of an 
anthology featuring the best time travel stories in the history of SF. But if 
science fiction is impossible, what is it that gives these stories their allure?

HG Wells's Time Machine is the grand-daddy of time-travel allegories. Just as 
War of the Worlds wasn't really a story about Martians invading Woking, Wells's 
time travel classic isn't really about time travel. The journey we take with 
the story's nameless narrator to the year 802,701 AD is only a way for Wells to 
show us the classbound society of 1895 in a new light. The Eloi and Morlocks 
are the bourgeois and the proletariat of industrial Britain. A society soon to 
be radically disrupted by socialism, for which Wells was a leading advocate.

The paradox is one of time travel's greatest … paradoxes. Take the grandfather 
paradox. Let's say a reader of this column became so enraged by my claim that 
presentism is the only way to understand time travel, that they invented a time 
machine to go back and kill my grandfather. Would I still be able to write this 
column? If not, how would the reader read it and decide to murder me? Would 
eternalism suddenly be proved correct? The real paradox is that if time travel 
is impossible why do people take its consequences so seriously?

The Time Traveler's Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/romance/9780099464464/the-time-travelers-wife>
 is a notable absence from The Time Traveler's Almanac. Audrey Niffenegger put 
time travel back on the bestseller lists and gave it a veneer of literary 
credibility with her 2003 debut novel. It's a novel that sometimes angers the 
time-travel purist by dedicating very little time to the nonsense science often 
used to give the idea credibility. Instead Niffeneger weaves an intelligent 
study of absence and loss from the tale of a frustrated wife dealing with the 
frequent disappearances of her time-travelling husband.

Change, loss and grief are the real heart of the time-travel metaphor. It is 
time that takes things away from us – the places we know, the people we love, 
even our own selves when time brings that inevitable consequence of life – 
death. We're terrified of time, so it's hardly surprising we dream stories in 
which we have the power to change it.

But stories where time travel changes time – like Stephen King's 11/22/63 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781444727296/stephen-king>
 – tend to focus on the great moments of history. If you had one chance to 
change time, would you really save John F Kennedy from the sniper's bullet? Or 
would you travel back to give a parent an earlier diagnosis of cancer and a few 
more years of life? Or to stop your callow younger self walking out on the 
person you only later realised you loved? Those are the time-travel stories we 
tell every day, in the private world of dreams.
 