
This will doubtless come as a surprise to you, but Lost in Showbiz likes to 
think of itself as a column possessed of certain standards. Each week, as it 
trawls the showbiz gossip mags – an experience not unlike having your brain 
slowly pulled out through your anus – it chooses to shield you, beloved 
readers, from what we might call the bottom half of celebrity. You may 
think the people it covers are hollow, vacuous, pointless signifiers of a world 
gone desperately wrong, but LiS can tell you: they're like Aung San Suu Kyi 
and Étienne Klein compared with some of the characters knocking about the pages 
of Now and Closer: the cast of The Only Way is Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-only-way-is-essex>, the 
mid-noughties Big Brother contestants stretching out their 15 minutes by any 
means necessary, the baleful figure of Josie Cunningham, a would-be model whose 
recent attempt to strike a deal with a pound shop to sell DVDs of her giving 
birth – to a child that she offered to abort if it would get her on Big Brother 
– sadly fell through.

But just occasionally, from their serried ranks, there emerges someone so 
amazing that Lost in Showbiz feels impelled to bend its own rules and share 
them with you. Which brings us to Mark-Francis Vandelli, star of E4's scripted 
reality show Made in Chelsea.

Lost in Showbiz loves many things. It loves nature, art and beauty; it 
loves its wife and children; it loves a two-for-one deal on Tesco Everyday 
Value Gin. But – with all respect to its partner and offspring – perhaps more 
than anything, it loves the sound of a honking posho saying idiotic things.

Its heart skips a beat when it thinks of the list of 33 Things That Nicky 
Haslam Thinks Are "Common", an inventory compiled by a BBC reporter who 
followed the society interior designer for a year and which variously included: 
swans, champagne flutes, organic food, pronouncing the "e" in "furore", 
art deco, drinking cappuccinos after 11am, jet lag, framed photographs of 
anyone non-royal, coloured bath towels and wheat intolerance.

Earlier this year, it boggled in delight and awe when AA Gill revealed his 
indispensable 10 Rules for Eating. It liked: "The things on the dining 
table should have a value to you, not necessarily financial but familial, or 
cultural – they should mean something beyond their utility … it should be 
polished with memories and rituals." But its absolute favourite was, "Never 
carry a cup of coffee in public – it's embarrassing and needy", largely because 
it imaginedBritain's best-loved baboon-killer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/26/aa-gill-shot-baboon> walking the 
streets in a constant state of puce mortification, unable to speak because he 
was too busy tutting and rolling his eyes every time he passed someone holding 
a latte.

So imagine Lost in Showbiz's joy when it chanced on an interview with the 
aforementioned Mr Vandelli. There he was, moaning about other people's ghastly 
vulgarity, from the lofty position of dignity and discernment that is appearing 
on an E4 scripted reality show and, occasionally, ITV2's Celebrity Juice. "When 
I was approached to film Made in Chelsea, I did not expect it to be quite what 
it's become in terms of following people's private lives," he offers, 
understandably miffed. Perhaps he thought it was one of those other kind of 
reality show, the non-invasive kind that keeps a respectful distance from its 
subjects and doesn't pry: you never hear that much about them, do you? 
Or perhaps he thought it wasn't actually a reality show at all, but part 
of E4's glittering panoply of high-quality, intellectually stimulating arts 
programming: Natalie Cassidy: Becoming Mum, World's Greatest Body Shockers, 50 
Greatest Plastic Surgery Shockers, 50 Greatest Wedding Shockers and Balls of 
Steel Australia.

Nevertheless, we should all be thankful he agreed, for Made in Chelsea has 
provided Mr Vandelli with a platform from which he can promulgate his unique 
worldview. He believes Kim Kardashian "is the embodiment of so many things that 
I believe to be wrong about society", not for any of the reasons you might 
reasonably assume, but because he doesn't like anyone with a big bum.

"I'm surprised that people found it so funny that I didn't know what Nando's 
was," he adds. "There are loads of things I do know that other people might 
not. I have key words for French 18th-century furniture." Reader, leave aside 
for a moment the nagging feeling that Mr Vandelli's notion of "key words" may 
include complex technical terms such as "bed" and "chair", and listen on, as he 
dispenses advice on good taste and manners. "I think people who don't use a 
bidet are unhygienic and I don't approve of them" is obviously a good start, 
but it's swiftly outstripped by his steadfast belief that it is vulgar for food 
to smell of food: "If you invite me to a dinner party and there is a smell of 
food in any way, I probably won't be able to stay."

Clearly, this is eminence on a level that bears comparison not with Haslam or 
Gill, but one of the all-time greats. Raef Bjayou, the former Apprentice 
contestant who appeared in OK! magazine, photographed in his family's Mayfair 
home, wearing a monocle, answering the phone in a bowler hat and favouring the 
world with his golden philosophy: "Women are a fairly smug bunch of people," 
etc. That marked the start of a glittering media career: Come Dine With Me, 
Celebrity Coach Trip, an episode of Channel 5'sCelebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Wedding Planner alongside 
Stuart "The Brand" Baggs. Without wishing to make wild predictions, Lost in 
Showbiz feels certain that another star of that ilk has been born.
 