
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> has intervened in 
Labour’s leadership contest to warn against a move leftwards by the party, 
declaring that it will lose again without a “fundamental revision” of strategy 
and organisation.

The former prime minister, who led Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to three general election 
victories, criticised the stance adopted by the party during this year’s 
general election, saying it “had a feel too much of an old-fashioned position”.

While not backing any particular candidate in the leadership race, he told the 
Times: “The public always looks for a leader who is going to lead the country 
and can rise above their party. If you retreat into your comfort zone, you lose 
— that’s the lesson of 100 years of our history.

“I don’t see any evidence that [the country] has shifted to the left ... the 
Labour party has to have an alignment of strategy and tactics and that strategy 
has to be based on the centre ground – not splitting the difference between 
progressive and conservative positions but a radical centre in which you are 
able to take decisions for the future of the country.”

Warning against moving to the left in a bid to recover voters lost to the SNP 
in Scotland, or to UKIP in the north of England, he urged caution: “We have got 
to be really careful of this. The truth is, a strong Labour party occupying the 
centre ground operates a gravitational pull from both left and right.”


Blair’s comments came as his former director of communications and strategy, 
Alastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, 
pledged to “happily lead the charge” to oust Labour’s next leader if they 
failed to perform.

He told the Times: “I’m not going to back anybody publicly … But if in three 
years’ time they’re not winning and they’re not cutting it, and it is obvious 
we are not going to get close to winning an election, I will not bite my tongue 
and I will encourage others not to bite their tongues.

Campbell, who became increasingly involved in the final weeks of the general 
election campaign and attended meetings with Ed Miliband’s inner circle, called 
on the winner of the Labour leadership contest to hold a confidence vote before 
2020 to prove they still had the party’s backing.
 