
A name in the closing credits may lack the profile of a famous face but 
without theatrical playwrights where would television and film be?

Joe Penhall, Martin McDonagh and Abi Morgan are hot Hollywood properties. 
Philip Ridley and Dennis Kelly are two of the most distinctive screenwriters 
around. Mike Leigh, David Hare andStephen Poliakoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-poliakoff> criss-cross from one to 
the other as Alan Bennett, Willy Russell and Dennis Potter did before them. 
Even Doctor Who and Sherlock's Steven Moffat debuted at the Edinburgh fringe. 
There is also a new generation coming along: Mike Bartlett, Lucy Kirkwood, Lucy 
Prebble, James Graham and DC Moore – the list goes on.

"So many British writers have come up through theatre that those who didn't 
are the exception, not the rule," saysChris Chibnall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chris-chibnall>, creator of the ITV hit TV 
series Broadchurch. Before he wrote episodes of Torchwood and Life on Mars, his 
plays ran at the Soho Theatre and Southwark Playhouse.

So how does writing for theatre train screenwriters? Screen and stage are 
fundamentally distinct art forms: they function in different ways, suit 
different stories and deploy different techniques.

"Some ideas fit the stage and some fit television," said Chibnall, adding 
that, very broadly speaking, character is dominant in theatre, whereas plot 
takes precedence on screen: "Television demands story progression. It's 
relentless and ruthless. If you're not moving your story on in every scene, 
even if it's only 30 seconds long, the form won't support it."

In other words, television is unforgiving. It makes sense: channel-hopping is 
easier than walking out of a show. You need to know audiences, which is why 
Chibnall cites his time as writer-in-residence at a tiny pub theatre in Hampton 
Wick as pivotal: "I made sure I sat in on pretty much every performance, 
watching the audience night after night, trying to work out why moments landed, 
what was funny, when people fidgeted. You can really spot when an audience is 
bored and if it happens more than twice then it's not them, it's you."

Bafta-winner Tony Marchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/jan/11/tony-marchant-screenwriter-playwright>
, the man behind Garrow's Law and Holding On as well as a former 
writer-in-residence at the Royal National Theatre, had a similar realisation 
during aPaines Plough <http://www.painesplough.com/> tour of his Falklands 
play, Welcome Home, in 1983. He would constantly assess the audiences' 
reactions and remembers one scene – a barnstorming, chilling speech by a 
corporal – that should have led into the interval. "Rather than make a decisive 
break with the audience on the edge of their seat, the play ran into another 
scene and that energy dissipated. I realised that sense of anticipation, that 
sweet spot, was what it's all about. Television sets out to keep viewers 
watching and hook them back in. That was the first time I became aware of the 
need to grip an audience through story."

However, the bigger the story, the harder it can be to maintain tension. For 
Marchant, another advantage of playwriting is the natural – though by no means 
absolute – progression from small-scale studio plays to epics. "When you write 
for screen, you can find yourself writing 50, 60, even 70 different scenes and 
locations."

He believes that his generation had a smooth transition into screenwriting, 
thanks to the vogue for televised plays during the seventies and eighties. Such 
work usually led into stand-alone dramas: "An hour long, with 10, 11 or 12 
scenes. It wasn't going from one extreme to the other."

Nowadays, he says, the jump is much wider, or some writers find themselves 
doing soaps and continuing dramas to learn and hone their technique. There, 
says Marchant, "you're co-opted to write in a format where all that matters is 
the craft you apply. You learn how to write in a real nuts and bolts kind of 
way".

But you forfeit a lot too: urgency, individuality, the drive to say something 
particular from the heart. "Old school as it is, I'm with Dennis Potter: TV 
should provoke a national conversation, regardless of falling audiences and the 
atomisation of the broadcasting spectrum. It's become much harder for young 
writers to do that in TV, but theatre still depends on it. Plays are about 
preoccupations and obsessions and, as such, theatre lets young writers develop 
their voice."

For Chibnall, that gives playwrights an almighty advantage, especially with 
the current vogue for long-form, serialised storytelling, which places 
increased emphasis on individuality, scale and character. "You can have much 
longer stories, and with 12-odd hours to tease [it] out; you can have a larger 
ensemble, more space for character development and much more scope to write 
great parts for great actors."

Broadchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> has a lot 
of those traits. Chibnall points out that it shies away from genre-style 
scenes, usually to let character drive the plot, and relies heavily on emerging 
back stories and relating off-screen events. That means that much of the drama 
centres on reaction rather than action – just as it does in theatre.

However, Chibnall also suspects that things might be about to change. If 
theatre has always been a natural starting point for dramatists, that is partly 
because anyone can do it. All you need is a space, some actors and an audience. 
"Nowadays, it's as easy to make your own short film as it is to put on a fringe 
production. It's probably cheaper and easier to get people to see it too … I 
suspect you'll start to see a generation of screenwriters that has only ever 
written for the screen."

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 