
Is it a sign of strength or weakness for a critic to admit to a change of 
mind? It's always useful for consumers to know that reviewers have a solid 
baseline of values against which their decisions are made. We understand that 
Mark Kermode is perhaps more likely to appreciate any given horror movie than a 
normal filmgoer, and each of my paeans to John Updike is followed by postcards 
and letters from Radio 4 listeners dismissing him as a vulgar American 
pornographer.

And yet, though it would shake my cultural bearings if Kermode suddenly 
declared that the latest chainsaw scene had left him a little bit queasy and 
wanting to see Local Hero, I have to make an equivalent recantation.

There has always been a particular British writer whose novels seemed to me 
the opposite of what writing and reading should be. In print and in private, I 
have mocked her dessicated sentences, characterless protagonists and 
action-free narratives. But a few days ago, I picked up her latest from a 
bookshop table, gleefully checking that the book that takes her output to two 
dozen continued the anaemic achievements of the previous 23.

A few hours later, reaching with regret the sudden white space at the bottom 
of page 202, I felt the mental confusion of a committed vegetarian who finds 
himself scribbling the chef a congratulatory note on the rib of beef. 
Strangers, byAnita Brookner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>, 
was - somehow, inexplicably - a novel of great stylistic beauty and 
psychological truth.

My thing with Brookner goes back exactly 25 years ago when Hotel du Lac won 
the Booker prize. To an aspiring literary critic, this frail, thin book about a 
frail, thin heroine coming to terms with loveless solitude at a Swiss hotel 
seemed the epitome of the bloodless, sexless, plotless English novel that had 
led us to study American literature at college.

Subsequently, one of the subjects for my debut appearance on the Radio 3 
chatshow Critics' Forum turned out to be the latest Brookner, in which another 
west London spinster didn't quite get it together with a semi-comatose widower. 
What passed for a plot twist was the heroine experiencing a severe migraine. I 
have a memory of a moment when the central character was forced to return early 
from a stroll because the weight of the spectacle frames on her nose had become 
unbearable.

Another book would come along most years - with a single woman sitting in a 
gloomy flat cataloguing missed opportunities - and each confirmed Brookner as 
the touchstone of the stuff I wouldn't touch. Some may be tempted to see this 
as a gender prejudice, but AS Byatt, Hilary Mantel, Margaret Atwood and Alison 
Lurie are fixtures on my bookshelf. The better explanation is that any kind of 
taste involves differentiation between sweet and sour.

It has often been pointed out that writing and reading are oppositional 
activities: the style we employ or enjoy is a rebuke to the forms that we 
abhor. If my favourite writers are John Updike and Philip Roth - whose novels 
are big American books about sex - then Brookner's small English meditations on 
celibacy inevitably became the enemy. Admiring writers such as Julian Barnes 
and Martin Amis for their abhorrence of cliche and desire to write entirely 
fresh sentences, Brookner's conventional - and even repetitive - grammar and 
vocabulary were unacceptable.

What made me really angry at the time was the suggestion from a senior critic 
that I was simply too young to understand these books. But now - with glum 
reluctance, like a woman counting her failures beside a Swiss lake - I see that 
this was right. There are writers we grow into. Brookner's themes - ageing and 
isolation - seem pointless and self-pitying to a twentysomething reader. But 
decay and/or loneliness will come to all of us, and pages which seemed opaque 
eventually become a mirror.

Objectively, Strangers has all the faults my younger self identified: a man 
and a woman who seem to possess neither genitals or sense of humour fence 
around each other before accepting disappointment. But the pitiless depiction 
of the final stages of life - and the refusal to allow her characters any 
consolation - makes Strangers as great a reflection on fear and regret as 
Philip Larkin's poem Aubade or Beckett's Endgame.

What now? There's another English novelist whose books I've always found 
unbearably tedious and thematically irrelevant. Dare I take one down from the 
shelf and risk another back-flip? Perhaps Jane Austen will turn out to have 
been a decent writer, after all.

comment@theguardian.com <mailto:comment@theguardian.com>
 