
The Argosy

The fortunes of East Atlanta Village have waxed and waned in recent years, 
from fairytale of urban renewal to dark fable of sputtering gentrification. The 
Argosy, a bold and appealing gastropub that premiered last February in a former 
flea market, experienced its own fits and starts before conjuring some of the 
neighbourhood's old mojo. Named after a merchant ship, the massive den swims in 
dark-wood everything. It's become an amusing, casual hangout for the 
neighbourhood, known for the extensive beer selection and a perfect spot for 
killing a pint or two while observing hipster mating rituals.
• 470 Flat Shoals Avenue, argosy-east.com <http://argosy-east.com/>. Open 
Mon-Fri 5pm-2.30am, Sat-Sun midday-2.30am

Sister Louisa's Church of the Living Room and Ping Pong Emporium
 Sister Louisa's Church of the Living Room and Ping Pong Emporium, Atlanta 
Former-seminarian-turned-folk-artist Grant Henry took a leap of faith in 2010, 
opening a cheeky ping-pong parlour in a half-empty stretch of Edgewood Avenue. 
He doubled down on the gamble by covering the exposed brick walls with 
irreverent Jesus paintings credited to his alter-ego, Sister Louisa. The 
kitschy sanctuary of sin quickly acquired a zealous congregation of inked 
urbanites, scruffy grad students, aging scene queens and, eventually, incognito 
celebrities. On Wednesdays, the faithful don choir robes for Church Organ 
Karaoke, while epic table-tennis showdowns occur nightly. Sister Louisa's has 
assisted in at least one irrefutable miracle: bringing a lifeless business 
district back from the dead.
• 466 Edgewood Avenue SE, sisterlouisaschurch.com 
<http://www.sisterlouisaschurch.com>. Open Sun 5pm-midnight, Mon-Sat 5pm-3am

The Sound Table

Serving as a counterbalance to Sister Louisa's tacky exuberance across the 
street, the Sound Table takes understated sophistication to extremes. The 
Scandinavian minimalism of the interior (blond-wood banquettes, clutter-free 
walls) suggests a chilled, worldly vibe that might border on cold, were it not 
for the gracious staff – or the dancefloor that's dependably packed 
neck-to-elbow. Before the midnight revelry, the Sound Table serves stylish 
cocktails and small plates inspired by "international street food". A rotating 
cast of DJs keep the beats fresh and unpredictable, ranging from soulful funk 
45s and Afro house to experimental electronic dance music – an aural feast for 
Table dancers.
• 483 Edgewood Avenue, thesoundtable.com <http://www.thesoundtable.com>. Open 
Tue-Sat 7pm-2.30am, Sun 7pm-midnight

Krog Bar

The Old Fourth Ward, once a wasteland of derelict warehouses, has erupted 
suddenly as a white-hot culinary scene. Or maybe not so suddenly: "Iron Chef 
America" championKevin Rathbun <http://www.kevinrathbun.com/restaurants.html‎> 
launched his eponymous restaurant and its tiny sibling, Krog Bar, there almost 
10 years ago, long before the buzz began. Housed in a 19th-century potbelly 
stove factory, the dimly-lit wine bar channels the coy ambience of a seductive 
Spanish bistro, with a dizzying wine list and tempting tapas menu. It's best 
absorbed late in the evening, another subtle nod to Spain. Don't be surprised 
when a different sort of buzz sets in and romance ensues at a corner table. No 
wonder the neighbours call it "snog bar".
• 112 Krog Street, Site 27, krogbar.com <http://www.krogbar.com>. Open Mon-Sat 
4.30pm-midnight

Wrecking Bar Brewpub
 Wrecking Bar Brew Pub, Atlanta 
Cocktail connoisseurs can be a fickle lot, stampeding a new hotspot then 
vanishing into the night. Beer drinkers tend to be more loyal, as evidenced by 
the steady popularity of Wrecking Bar Brewpub. Owners Bob and Kristine Sandage 
unveiled their much-anticipated Little Five Points taproom three years ago in 
the basement of a renovated Victorian mansion. Its original pub grub and 
mile-long whiskey list deserve credit, but the craft beers remain the real 
draw. The cavernous space fills up even on random weeknights, the thick granite 
walls echoing like a medieval fortress.
• 292 Moreland Avenue, wreckingbarbrewpub.com 
<http://www.wreckingbarbrewpub.com>. Open Mon-Thu 4pm-11pm, Fri-Sat 
midday-midnight, Sun 11am-10pm

Ormsby's

West Midtown may be a wonderland for gourmands but the bar options remain 
underwhelming. One exception is Ormsby's, a two-storey gastropub nearly hidden 
beneath the White Provision building (a 1910 meat-packing plant, recently 
refurbished as a posh urban market). The enormous tavern doubles as a lively 
adult playground, with two bocce ball courts, pool tables, skee ball, 
shuffleboard and darts. The bar is famous as a getaway for Georgia Tech 
students, though the age range can span from millennials to soccer mums (who, 
no doubt, are loudly hogging the shuffle board).
• 1170 Howell Mill Road, ormsbysatlanta.com 
<http://ormsbysatlanta.com/index.html>. Open Mon-Fri 11.30am-3am, Sat 
midday-3am, Sun midday-midnight

Prohibition

Buckhead Village, once a notorious nightlife district, was mercilessly 
bulldozed in 2007 but its indulgent spirit only went underground. The old 
hood's curious mixture of playfulness and tenacity lives on in Prohibition, a 
cigar bar that bills itself as a 1920's speakeasy. Guests enter a British red 
telephone box, dial a "secret" number, then push a hidden door to find a 
well-appointed throwback to classic jazz cabarets. With the stricter-than-usual 
dress code (blazers and skirts, no jeans or trainers) and $13 cocktails, it may 
feel like a production. Still, Prohibition makes for a charming place to 
reminisce about drinking in the old days.
• 56 East Andrews Drive, prohibitionatl.com <http://www.prohibitionatl.com/>. 
Open Mon-Sat 5pm-3am

Paper Plane
 Paper Plane, Atlanta 
As with Prohibition, finding Decatur hideaway Paper Plane can require 
ingenuity. Locals may direct you toVictory Sandwich Bar + Emporium 
<http://www.vicsandwich.com> but the actual entrance is an easily overlooked 
door in a far-from-obvious back hallway. In aviation terms, the nostalgic 
interior is hardly bigger than a puddle jumper, with a handful of 
padded-leather booths and a snug bar just like the one in Edward Hopper's 
Nighthawks. The retro-inspired cocktails, however, qualify as jet fuel. For a 
quick liftoff, try the Tart Breaker: rye whiskey, campari, and pecan.
• 340 Church Street, Decatur, the-paper-plane.com 
<http://www.the-paper-plane.com/#contact>. Open Mon-Thu 5pm-midnight, Fri-Sat 
5pm-1am

Joystick Gamebar
 Photograph: Alamy 
A bratty new kid in an up-and-coming nightlife strip, Joystick Gamebar 
delivers something different from ATL's many meat markets: an escape hatch into 
the pixelated bliss of yesteryear. For only a quarter, unleash your inner nerd 
on the addictive collection of vintage arcade games. Look for old-school 
favourites such as Ms Pac Man and Galaga, along with a few oddball artefacts 
(Turtles in Time, anyone?) Gameplay gets extra challenging after a couple of 
the speciality cocktails. The names may be jokey – Decisions Before Dawn, A 
Desperate Venture – but the potency isn't child's play.
• 427 Edgewood Avenue, joystickgamebar.com <http://www.joystickgamebar.com/>. 
Open Mon-Sat 5pm-2.30am, Sun 5pm-midnight

El Bar

Almost nothing about this no-frills Poncey-Highlands dive bar makes sense: the 
incomprehensible location beneath a Mexican restaurant (El Azteca), the 
melting-pot crowd (twerking party princesses, aspiring record producers, 
reformed frat bros) that varies nightly, or its solid reputation as a 
late-night dance club: despite the microscopic dancefloor. Such objections have 
a way of dissolving as the night wears on, when El Bar's elite begin to surface 
and the featured DJ starts spinning anything from ghetto hip-hop to 80s funk. 
Who needs a dancefloor?
• 939 Ponce de Leon Avenue, facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/El-Bar/103077318374>. Open Wed-Sat 11am-3am

Tray Butler <http://traybutler.tumblr.com/> is a writer and illustrator based 
in Atlanta. He is the author ofMoon Atlanta 
<http://moon.com/books/moon-atlanta/>, a guide to the city

• Find out more information about Atlanta nightlife at discoveramerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com>
 