
The Tarka Trail

There's no need to bike all 30 miles of this traffic-free route through the 
backdrop to Henry Williamson's classic story; many families just plump for the 
six miles from Braunton to Barnstaple. Along this flat section you can 
Tarka-hunt along the banks of the Taw, spot wildfowl on the mudflats and keep 
interest piqued with gems from the downloadable audio guide (
northdevonbiosphere.org.uk <http://www.northdevonbiosphere.org.uk>). Take a 
picnic or try theBoston Tea Party 
<http://www.bostonteaparty.co.uk/cafe/barnstaple> cafe in Barnstaple, with 
ethical cuisine, lashings of tea and cake, and excellent-value kids' fare.
• devon.gov.uk/tarkatrail <http://www.devon.gov.uk/tarkatrail>. The route is 
signposted from the tourist information centre in Braunton; rent bikes from 
Otter Cycle Hire (01271 813339) close to the start of the trail in Braunton

 Lydford Gorge, near Tavistock
 Photograph: Susanna Bennett/Alamy 
Step into the deepest gorge in the south west and experience the force of 
nature from the foot of the 30m White Lady waterfall. Trails of varying lengths 
and gradients take you to the highlights: stand above the bubbling water of the 
Devil's Cauldron, follow the River Lyd as it tumbles through wild woodland, 
play pooh sticks from the bridges and discover giant caterpillars and fungi 
carved from fallen trees. You could pack a picnic but there are two National 
Trust tearooms serving cream teas, lunches and takeaway picnic supplies. The 
terrain is not buggy-friendly, but you can borrow a baby backpack, or zigzag 
some way down the gorge along the accessible railway path.
• 01822 820320, nationaltrust.org.uk/lydfordgorge 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/lydford-gorge/>, open March-November, adults 
£5.90, children £3, family £14.80, NT members free

Exmoor Zoo, Barnstaple
 Photograph: Alamy 
You could try and hunt down the Beast of Exmoor on the moors, but a better 
place to guarantee a sighting is Exmoor Zoo, where the black leopard hogs the 
limelight. This is no big city zoo but the expansion of a conservation park 
where little critters – spiders, otters, wallabies – in natural-style 
enclosures – make up much of what there is to see. There are larger beasts such 
as lemurs, lynx and a leopard, but getting up close and personal is what it's 
all about. Touch snakes and spiders in handling sessions, learn about the 
animals through feeding sessions and talks, and follow zoo trails around the 
different species and their habitats. Super-keen kids can even sign up to be a 
zoo keeper for half a day (full days for 15s and over).
• 01598 763352, exmoorzoo.co.uk <http://exmoorzoo.co.uk/>, open year round, 
adults £10.95, children £7.95, family £32.50. Zoo keeper experience £85 for a 
half-day

Lynton and Lynmouth
 Photograph: Alamy 
Sitting on the lip of Exmoor, the towns of Lynton and Lynmouth bring together 
the wild beauty of the moors and the towering sea cliffs of north Devon. You 
can take in the scenery on a buggy-friendly stroll from Lynton (
southwestcoastpath.com/walksdb/247 <http://southwestcoastpath.com/walksdb/247>) 
or, for a more exciting trip, ride the cliff railway. Let the Victorian 
water-powered lift take the strain of the 300m cliffs between the two towns, 
leaving you to take in views across the Bristol Channel to Wales. There's a 
Cliff Top restaurant and plenty of souvenir shops to squander pocket money in, 
or just lap up the British seaside from Lynmouth's picture-perfect shingle 
cove, a fine spot for rock pooling, crabbing and eating fish and chips (try the 
Esplanade Fish Bar).
• cliffrailwaylynton.co.uk <http://www.cliffrailwaylynton.co.uk/>, open daily 
February-November, adults £3 return, children £2 return, dogs and buggies £1.50 
return. See also lynton-lynmouth-tourism.co.uk 
<http://lynton-lynmouth-tourism.co.uk/>

Lundy Island
 Photograph: Alamy 
Just because there are no cars and wildlife outnumbers residents on Lundy 
Island, don't be fooled into thinking there's little for families to do there. 
Join in snorkel safaris and rock pool rambles (see the board by the shop for 
daily activities), or grab a "letterboxing" pack (also from the shop) and 
follow clues around the wild terrain. Binoculars are essential: even if you 
don't spot the bright-beaked puffins the island is named after, you'll clock up 
numerous sightings of seabirds, feral deer and Soay sheep, and with any luck 
spot dolphins on the 11-mile ferry crossing. Be warned that with buggies and 
young children it's a gruelling ascent from the boat to up the cliffs, but once 
you're there, the terrain is more level. If you can muster the energy to climb 
another 147 steps, look out over Devon, Cornwall, Wales and Somerset from the 
lamp chamber of the old lighthouse.
• 01271 863636, lundyisland.co.uk <http://lundyisland.co.uk/>. The MS 
Oldenburg departs from Ilfracombe or Bideford from March–October, day return 
£34.50 adults, £18 children, £5.50 under-fours, family £80. From November to 
mid-March a helicopter service runs from Hartland Point, west of Barnstaple 
(£102 adult return)

Tunnels Beaches, Ilfracombe
 Photograph: Alamy 
Paying to get on to a beach might sound outrageous, but the nominal entrance 
fee to this private cove and Victorian tidal pool is worth it. The tunnels 
– carved to enable beach access from town when seawater bathing was in vogue – 
are lined with mounted archives, memorabilia and information panels that whisk 
you back to the pools' opening in 1823. Once on the dark-sand beach, children 
can explore smugglers' caves, poke around rock pools and leap into the 
remaining tidal pool (once there were three). It's a unique beach trip (with 
easy entry for buggies and beach paraphernalia) and the facilities are 
flawless, with shop, family restaurant, play hut and award-winning loos. Plus, 
if the weather scuds in, it's a quick dash to the town's aquarium (
ilfracombeaquarium.co.uk <http://ilfracombeaquarium.co.uk/>). 
• 01271 879882, tunnelsbeaches.co.uk <http://tunnelsbeaches.co.uk/>, open 
Easter-October, adults £2.50, children (three-15) £1.95, family £8.50

Woolacombe beach
 Photograph: Tony Gale/Alamy 
Woolacombe's three miles of sand is ranked as one of Britain's best beaches, 
and is well worth seeing on any family trip to north Devon. Surfer dudes are 
attracted by the consistent Atlantic swell and waterside eateries give the 
place a laid-back Aussie vibe. Children can take surfing lessons from the age 
of eight, but even younger ones can boogie board. Try the Nick Thorn Surf 
School, which also offers coasteering trips, where you scramble, swim and 
rock-jump your way around the coastline.
• 01271 871337, nickthorn.com <http://nickthorn.com/>, surfing and coasteering 
sessions from £30

Arlington Court, near Barnstaple
 Photograph: Alamy 
Pat the shire horses in their stables then travel around the beautiful 
Arlington estate by horse-drawn carriage. There's a museum crammed with 
carriages once owned by lords and ladies, and model ships, pewter and shells 
are on display in the impressive Regency house. Children will be more excited 
about spying through the bat-cam, hunting for geocaches or following quiz 
trails from lawns and flower meadows through deer-inhabited woodland into the 
valley. Refuel in the Victorian kitchen tearoom, which serves all sorts of 
platters using fruit and veg from the kitchen garden.
• 01271 850296, nationaltrust.org.uk/arlington-court 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/arlington-court/>, open all year round, 
limited hours November–March, £8.30 adults, £4.10 children, £21 family, NT 
members free

The Big Sheep, Bideford
 Photograph: Mark Passmore 
It sounds a bit cheesy, but this sheep-themed park makes a surprisingly fun 
day out. Where else can you bet your ewe-ros (the park's currency) on the sheep 
racing and see border collies round up Indian running ducks? As well as sheep 
shearing, lamb feeding and horse whispering, there are pony rides, farm 
safaris, self-drive tractors and a soft play barn. There's an on-site brewery, 
and the Shepherds Restaurant does cream teas. And when you tire of sheep puns 
(or if older kids find the whole experience too silly), the site is also home 
to Battlefield Live for hi-tech laser gun battles (battlefieldlivedevon.co.uk 
<http://www.battlefieldlivedevon.co.uk>) and next door is the Ultimate 
Adventure Centre, with high ropes, zipwires and mountain boarding (
theultimatehigh.com <http://theultimatehigh.com/>). 
• 01237 472366, thebigsheep.co.uk <http://www.thebigsheep.co.uk>, open daily 
April-November, weekends and school holidays November-March (attractions 
limited in winter). Entry (summer/winter): £11.95/£6 adults and children over 
3ft tall, £5/£2.50 under three feet, babies free

Roadford Lake, near Okehampton
 Photograph: Alamy 
You don't have to be out on the water to have a good time at Roadford Lake. 
There's a cafe, forest trails, a visitor centre with interactive exhibits, and 
miles of shoreline to enjoy. But it is Devon's biggest watersports centre, so 
you can rent a rowing boat to explore the 730-acre lake, try angling or have a 
go at dinghy sailing, windsurfing or kayaking under expert tuition. And if you 
prefer to keep your feet dry, there are cycle paths, high ropes and archery.
• 01409 211507, swlakestrust.org.uk <http://www.swlakestrust.org.uk>. Parking 
£3 a day. Activity centre open daily in summer, reduced hours in winter, 
watersports from £12 a session

Know any great days out in the area? Add your recommendation in the comments 
below
 