
Sea kayaking, Plockton

Scotland might not always have the weather, but it has the turquoise seas and 
deserted white beaches and, if you don the right clobber, you've got no excuse 
not to spend a day learning to kayak. The waters around Plockton are sheltered, 
peppered with little islands and brimming with marine life. Alison French 
organises trips and courses geared to families, beginners, intermediates – and 
women-only groups (she also coaches at the annual Scottish Women's Paddle 
Symposium). You can paddle to remote coral beaches and secluded coves only 
accessible by boat for a picnic lunch or journey along the coastline, around 
Strome and Kishorn islands, eyes peeled for bottlenose dolphins, porpoise, 
seals and otters, drinking in the views of Skye, the wild Applecross Peninsula 
and mountains of Torridon.
• 01599 544422, seakayakplockton.co.uk <http://www.seakayakplockton.co.uk>. 
Trips offered year-round (although outside the main April-October season it's 
better for intermediates). Adults £85 per day, children (aged 13-17) £60 per 
day, overnight kayak camping expeditions an additional £15 per person per night

Eilean Donan, Dornie
 Photograph: Alamy 
Clamber around the ramparts and explore the dimly lit nooks and crannies of 
one of the most romantic castles in Scotland. Eilean Donan is perched on an 
island in a majestic mountain-fringed loch, just outside the little village of 
Dornie on the way to Skye. The craggy castle has been daubed across countless 
calendars, featured in that famous swooping BBC1 trailer and was the 
spectacular backdrop for films such as Hollywood blockbuster Highlander. 
Remember Christopher Lambert, kilt flying, racing across the causeway? (There 
are framed photos inside if you don't.) The original fortress was built in the 
13th century but was raised to the ground by clashing clans and today is 
largely a 20th-century Grand Designs-style restoration thanks to Lieutenant 
Colonel John MacRae-Gilstrap, who bought the ruin in 1911. After immersing 
yourself in Highland history there's a lovely contemporary cafe and shop to 
browse.
• 01599 555202, eileandonancastle.com <http://www.eileandonancastle.com>. 
Castle and exhibitions open daily 1 Feb-24 Dec, 10am-6pm, visitor centre open 
daily 12 March- 31 Oct, 10am-5pm. Adults £6.50, concessions £5.50, family £16, 
under 5s free

Ring of Bright Water – Eilean Bàn, Kyle of Lochalsh
 Ring of Bright Water – Eilean Ban, Kyle of Lochalsh 
Otter lovers and those who wept buckets over Gavin Maxwell's Ring of Bright 
Water should make a pilgrimage to Eilean Bàn or White Island, which huddles 
beneath the Skye Bridge. Once home to lighthouse keepers and their families, 
naturalist and author Maxwell bought the cottages in 1963 but only moved here a 
year before his death, in 1969. Today, you can book guided tours of the 
six-acre nature reserve through the Bright Water Visitor Centre in Kyleakin. 
Follow the nature trails around the island, relax in the sensory garden, and 
poke around the Maxwell museum, an atmospheric recreation of his living room 
set up by Virginia McKenna (who starred in the film adaptation) before visiting 
Teko, the otter's memorial stone and the award-winning wildlife hide to scour 
the water for seals, otters and, in season, minke whales.
• 01599 530040, eileanban.org <http://www.eileanban.org>. Tours Monday to 
Friday at 2pm, April to October; must be booked in advance by phone. Tours at 
other times of the year can be arranged by email. Adults £7, children and 
concessions £6, family ticket (two adults and two children) £20. Access to the 
island is via a wooden gate set in the wall of the Skye bridge. All tours 
include the Maxwell museum, Stevenson Lighthouse and award winning wildlife hide

Picture-perfect Plockton
 Photograph: Alamy 
The Scottish Highlands have a bleak, brooding beauty. The fishing village of 
Plockton, however, is a little pocket of prettiness. Palm trees line the 
waterfront thanks to its famously mild climate – a result of the warming effect 
of the Gulf Stream and its sheltered position on the east-facing shore of Loch 
Carron. The National Trust for Scotland conservation village was built in the 
19th century to try to stem emigration from the Highlands. Today, tourists 
flock here to visit the setting of BBC drama Hamish Macbeth, which stars Robert 
Carlyle as the Highland plod. Yachts moor in the bay, there are galleries to 
mooch around, pubs to crawl, boat trips during the summer from the harbour and 
regular guided walks of historic Plockton led by NTS rangers. (The walking 
tours visit the old pier and pontoons, the Brae with its crofts and ancient 
trees, the Open Air Church and the War Memorial.)
• Further information: plockton.com <http://www.plockton.com>

Attadale Gardens, Strathcarron
 Photograph: Alamy 
Dubbed an artist's garden with its Monet-style bridges and waterfalls, 
lily-strewn pools fringed by verdant vegetation and contemporary sculptures, 
owner Nicky Macpherson re-designed the 20-acre gardens (originally laid out by 
Baron Schroder in the 19th century) to frame the jaw-dropping views over the 
sea to Skye after violent storms hit in 1980. The rocky paths winding beneath 
craggy cliffs weave through a tangle of conifers and bushy rhododendrons and 
are lush and lovely, the experience wonderfully low-key – the ticket office a 
garden shed with antlers mounted on the side. In the kitchen and herb gardens 
you can buy salad and vegetables for your tea before wandering on to the fern 
garden with its geodesic dome (one of the largest collections in Scotland), the 
shady rhododendron dell, tranquil Japanese garden and, in front of the elegant 
whitewashed house, a giant sundial, over 10 metres in diameter.
• 01520 722603, attadalegardens.com <http://www.attadalegardens.com>. Open 
10am-5.30pm April-end October, closed Sundays. Adults £6, children £1, OAPS £4

Balmacara estate and woodland walks
 Balmacara 
There are DIY and ranger-led options for exploring this 2,550-hectare National 
Trust for Scotland estate. Hang a left heading towards Skye off the A87 
signposted Lochalsh Woodland Garden to meander the sheltered walks along the 
shores of Loch Alsh through the majestic Scots pine, oak and beech trees 
intermingled with rhododendrons, bamboo, ferns, and hydrangeas. Swing right off 
the main road towards Balmacara Square and the new National Trust visitor 
centre. During the summer there are regular guided rambles around the 
traditional Highland estate (a mix of farmed croft land, wood and moorland) and 
from Plockton to Kyle of Lochalsh, but it's worth keeping an eye out for 
special events and themed walks throughout the year.
• 0844 4932233, nts.org.uk 
<http://www.nts.org.uk/Property/Balmacara-Estate-Woodland-Walks>. Woodland 
Walks all year, daily 9am until dusk; Balmacara Square Visitor Centre: 1 April 
to 30 September, daily 9am-5pm (Fri 9am-4pm)

Wildlife cruises, Kyle of Lochalsh
 Seaprobe Atlantis 
The Seaprobe Atlantis is an award-winning glass-bottomed boat with an 
underwater viewing deck. You can gaze wide-eyed at the wildlife (dolphins, 
otters, whales, seals and seabirds) above and below the waves as you drift 
through the kelp forest with its starfish, crab, jellyfish and anemones, and 
motor out to Seal Island, a protected bird colony and HMS Port Napier, a second 
world war shipwreck.
• 0800 980 4846, seaprobeatlantis.com <http://www.seaprobeatlantis.com>. 
One-hour trips: adult £12.99, youth (13-15) £7.99 children £6.99, family £38; 
two-hour trips: adult £24, youth £13.50, children £12.50, family £69

Ride the Kyle Line, Kyle of Lochalsh
 Photograph: Alamy 
Hop aboard the little Scotrail train for one of the most spectacular rail 
journeys in the world (the Kyle Line was featured by Michael Palin in his TV 
series Great Railway Journeys of the World). The modern carriages might not be 
the most atmospheric but the views from the window as you snake towards the 
coast (looming mountains, rushing salmon-rich rivers, the steely waters of Loch 
Carron) more than make up for it. The spectacular 63-mile line from Dingwall to 
Kyle of Lochalsh was opened in 1897. Today, there are still three trains a day 
running back and forth from Inverness along the historic line (a 
two-and-a-half-hour journey). The Royal Scotsman and Orient Express are also 
occasional visitors while the Friends of the Kyle Line– who've fought to keep 
the line open – organise steam engine trips from time to time. At the end of 
the line, on the water's edge, there's a quirky little museum crammed with 
memorabilia and old black and white photos in the smart blue and white painted 
station on the harbour, a gift shop stocked with whisky and a restaurant.
• 01599 534824, kylerailway.co.uk <http://www.kylerailway.co.uk>. Day return 
from Kyle of Lochalsh to Inverness from £23.40 – to book call 08457550033 or 
visit a staffed station. Entry to the museum costs £1

Applecross peninsula
 Photograph: Alamy 
"Road normally impassable in wintry conditions" reads the red and white sign 
as you approach the Bealach na Ba, one of the highest passes (626m, 2,054ft) in 
Britain and the way in to the remote Applecross peninsula. The drive is a 
highlight in itself as you wind slowly up the single-track route hugging the 
passing places to the summit before snaking down to the little string of 
cottages on the waterfront. Applecross shot to fame as the location for Monty 
Halls' first Great Escape on the BBC, when the TV presenter and marine 
biologist tried his hand at crofting. The Applecross Inn (applecross.uk.com/inn 
<http://www.applecross.uk.com/inn/>) already had quite a following, however, 
for its fresh seafood, live music and great atmosphere. The Potting Shed (
applecrossgarden.co.uk <http://www.applecrossgarden.co.uk/>), a restored walled 
kitchen garden and restaurant is another popular eating place after you've 
worked up an appetite hiking across the windswept landscape and beachcombing 
along the wild, white strands of sand.

Pony trekking in Glenshiel

Think soft velvety noses, shaggy mains, the heady smell of saddle soap and the 
reassuring squeak of leather as you saddle up for a trek into the mountains on 
a sturdy, sure-footed Highland pony. The Campbell family has been breeding 
ponies in Glenshiel for more than 100 years and now runs a small pony trekking 
centre offering one-hour treks along the pebbly shores of Loch Duich and 
through the Ratagan forest as well as all-day trail rides up into the hills for 
the more adventurous. And what better way to explore this wild, untamed 
landscape than on the back of a native pony as it picks its way over the rough 
terrain in the shadow of the Five Sisters of Kintail, a string of peaks, three 
of which are Munros, on a jagged ridge?
• 01599 511282, highlandponytrekking.co.uk 
<http://www.highlandponytrekking.co.uk>. Pony treks £20pp per hour. Lessons, 
for ages six and over, £20 for 45 minutes
 