
Jools Oliver, ex-model, mother and wife of Jamie 
 Interview by Nicki Sprinz

'On a sunny day, sitting here at the Brew House Cafe is like being in the 
middle of the countryside; the views are really amazing and you never feel as 
though you're in central London. The cafe sells great ice creams and home-made 
cakes - they're delicious. It can be difficult to feed the girls in restaurants 
when I'm by myself, but I'm comfortable here. I love to take the girls out 
every afternoon and here they can run around and enjoy the sunshine. Poppy and 
Daisy really enjoy the novelty of eating outside, plus it means I don't have to 
do any clearing up after them.

I enjoy cooking now, but the truth is I used to hate it. Food only became 
important when I moved in with Jamie. I used to come back from a day's 
modelling and eat supermarket ready-meals. Naturally, I've picked up a few 
skills from living with him. During the week I'm home every night while Jamie 
works at the restaurant. That's when I dabble in the kitchen - without him 
there looking over my shoulder.

At the weekends it's a real treat because Jamie does all the cooking - the 
kids' meals get more exotic, he experiments with new recipes and ideas and I 
stay out of the kitchen.

Jamie and I always really like the idea of going out to eat, but when it comes 
to the crunch we mostly stay in and watch a DVD. If we do go out we like to go 
to Nobu [on Park Lane, London W1] - no one bothers us there.

It is when we go food shopping that people tend to stare. In the supermarket 
they seem interested in what we are buying - although I think they're probably 
more interested in Jamie's purchases than mine!'

 The Brew House 
Kenwood House 
Hampstead Lane 
London NW3 
020 8341 5384 

Alek Wek, model 
Interview by Zoe Smith

'There's nothing better than sitting outside on the deck at La Bottega on a 
hot summer's day surrounded by magnolia trees and white lanterns. The range of 
people who go there is just so diverse and the range of food on offer is a real 
treat. It's the perfect place to pop in to after work.

My favourite dish is grilled tuna with steamed spinach on the side. I usually 
have it with a salad. I always try to make sure that whatever I eat is balanced 
as I like to have my greens and my protein.

It's a really casual place to dine. You have views of Chelsea so one of the 
nice things about eating there is that you're not just stuck in some 
restaurant; you actually have a sense of where you are. I don't really buy into 
the whole hype that surrounds many of the restaurants in New York but I do 
enjoy the sort of places where the people are pleasant and the food is great. I 
can't understand why people go to a restaurant and sit there tossing and 
turning to see who else is dining there. Me? If I'm hungry and I go to a 
restaurant I want to sit down and eat. Some people get all dolled up and that's 
fine but I rarely feel like dressing up. As long as I'm clean, it's all good.

I don't really worry too much about what I eat but I can't just stuff my face 
with any kind of food. I think that's good in a way because, even though it 
sounds corny, what you eat is what you are. Breakfast is a must for me and 
lunch, too, because I run around all day and need something in my belly.

I love La Bottega but I don't go there too often because cooking is one of my 
passions. I pick up culinary influences from all the places I've travelled to 
but what I always crave is the sort of food that I used to hate when I was 
young. When I'm at home I like to prepare things like ochre stew with onions 
and fish, chicken or beef. My mum always sends my dried ochre in the post so I 
never run out of the stuff.

Stews feature a lot in Sudanese food and they're often eaten with rice or 
brown bread or kisra which is similar to a pancake, but much lighter. My mum 
does the most amazing cabbage stew that she steams, simmers and tosses. It's 
delicious. Unfortunately there aren't any Sudanese restaurants in New York but 
my friends don't mind because they can always order original Sudanese food at 
my place.

When I'm away from New York I miss the fact that you can eat at times when in 
other cities everything is closed. Sometimes in London, I think that I can eat 
when I finish working late, only to find that everything is closed. But it's 
never a catastrophe because I can always pop round to my mum's for some good 
food.'

 La Bottega 
The Maritime Hotel 
363 West 16th Street 
New York NY10011 
001 212 242 4300 
www.themaritimehotel.com <http://www.themaritimehotel.com>

Mourad Mazouz, restaurateur 
Interview by Rebecca Seal

'In Paris there are a few little bistros that I really love - and this is my 
favourite. Ramulaud serves traditional French food and is run by a great big 
guy with a huge moustache who also happens to be an ex-communist. He's arrogant 
in that very hilarious Parisian way. He and his waiters have all been there for 
years and it doesn't take long to be treated like a local.

Now when I go I don't order from the menu; I just sit down and they bring me 
things to try. The staff are quite firm though - if they think you're ordering 
the wrong wine for the food they say so.

Once I arrived on my moped for lunch but there were no vacant tables. So I 
just wheeled the bike in between two tables, sat on it and waited. The waiter 
came, took my order, and brought me a delicious lunch. I ate it balancing on 
the bike.

I miss places like it when I'm in London. I miss the neighbourliness of Paris. 
I love sitting outside a bistro watching the world pass, close to the other 
tables, listening to the other people talk, the regulars, the old drunk guy 
mumbling on his own, the people who come in every day. I haven't found that in 
London.

There was another little bistro in Paris that I loved very much when I lived 
there but it closed down a few years ago. The couple who ran it were in their 
seventies - they had had the restaurant for nearly 50 years. But every night 
they would have a huge fight, throw plates of food on the floor, scream about 
how much one had ruined the other's life, right in the middle of the 
restaurant. And the next night they would be there again, quietly serving food 
until one of them made a mistake and then the show would start all over again.

I try and go to Paris as much as possible. When I really want to forget about 
my work in London [Mourad runs the restaurants Momo and Sketch] I check in to a 
little hotel and head for Ramulaud.'

 Le Ramulaud 
269, rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine 
75011 Paris 
00 33 1 43 72 23 29 

Thandie Newton, actress 
 Interview by Chloe Diski

'I just love this place. When I first came here six years ago, I didn't get a 
feel for the atmosphere because it was at night. The River Cafe is still 
magical in the evening because you can see lights over the Thames, but it's in 
the day when the sun is out that you really appreciate where it is. I love 
sitting by this particular stretch of the river Thames, surrounded by great 
architecture and it's incredibly peaceful.

I first met Ruth Rogers [co-owner of the restaurant] at my friend [the 
artist]Sam Taylor-Wood's house. I remember Sam saying to me, 'Oh God, Ruth is 
coming and I'm really nervous because I've got to cook for her.' That evening I 
had this really bizarre moment when I just found myself giving Ruthie a hug. I 
was shocked at myself and said, 'Oh my God. I'm so sorry.' I knew what I was 
doing (I don't drink), but it was such an unconscious act. Ruthie has that 
incredible aura.

It is a great place to take children: the staff offer food straight away if 
they see you have a kid and they don't mind if they play on the lawn in front - 
in fact, they encourage it by putting a couple of Spacehoppers out for them to 
bounce on.

The second time I came here, I had the chocolate nemesis and that was it - I 
was hooked. The River Cafe serves seasonal food but thank God chocolate doesn't 
have a season. At the moment my favourite dish is sea bass with cherry tomatoes 
and anchovies - it is unbelievable. I love the bruschetta with Cornish crab, 
too (I'm from Cornwall so it reminds me of home).

Often when I go out to eat, I sometimes feel that the chef is just trying to 
show off. Here they seem to want to celebrate the food, not themselves. Here 
they uncover the food. It's naked. It's what real Italian food is all about.'

 The River Cafe 
Thames Wharf, 
Rainville Road, London 
020 7386 4200 

Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen, interior designer 
 Interview by Rebecca Seal

'I am a creature of habit so I always have tuna tartare and then seared fillet 
of beef when I come here, although the rest of the menu is lovely. I only drink 
vodka with lunch - wine gives me a hangover. I might sometimes have frogs' legs 
and a little foie gras starter. Youcef, the new chef, does little amuses 
bouches too - today we had a little roast breast of quail and scallops. I'm a 
big protein fan, sort of a reformed Atkinser - which is such a boy's diet after 
all. I like food that is recognisably meat. Like an ear. Or offal. I'm fighting 
the onset of a 40-year-old's rotundity, especially since giving up smoking at 
Christmas. The upsetting thing is that, since stopping, I haven't eaten more, I 
just seem to absorb every last calorie.

My friend Frank and I have lunch here at least once a week - my offices are 
just round the corner. My wife Jackie came with us last week, which is quite 
rare, since Frank and I have a tendency either to sit around discussing the 
exact stipple technique William Hogarth used in the 1720s or fart jokes. I 
think she was a bit shocked. It's wonderful to have lunch in the sun now that 
they have this garden. It is in huge contrast to the inside, which is really 
quite dark. If you think back 10 years, no restaurant had a garden and now 
everyone is dragging tables outside - which actually only makes sense if you're 
somewhere nice like this and not in Piccadilly Circus.

The Spread Eagle is an old coaching inn and the garden is the old coach yard. 
It's always been a part of the real Greenwich - the old theatrical, randy, 
bawdy, sailor-infested Greenwich, which I find really rather horny and love the 
idea of bringing more of that back. The whole place is about the contrast of 
slum and splendour, even if now the slums are all furnished by Ikea and have 
Changing Rooms on the telly in the corner.

I am emphatically not good at cooking, as Mrs Llewelyn-Bowen will testify. I 
am a phenomenally talented and really very enthusiastic pot-washer but I can't 
even make salad dressing properly. I can just about bring pasta to the boil, 
but there is a fair chance it will take on some strange and unthought-of 
consistency during the cooking process. We eat out a huge amount as a family 
and my kids aren't at all fussy; if they don't see anything on the menu they 
like, they won't moan and whinge to us, but will quietly ask the waiter if they 
could just have some pasta. I think that shows that if the worst should happen, 
they would be able to survive, especially in Knightsbridge.'

The Spread Eagle Restaurant 
1 & 2 Stockwell St 
Greenwich , London SE10 9JB 
020 8853 2333 

Alberta Ferretti, fashion designer 
 Interview by Allegra Donn

'The wonderful thing about Italy is that you don't have to travel far to taste 
different types of food. This is because Italian cuisine is very much based on 
local produce; if you're by the sea, it'll be fish, if you're inland, it'll be 
more meat-based. It is as simple as that.

The Vicolo Santa Lucia offers a traditional type of cooking from the area - it 
is on the Adriatic coast near Rimini - with an oriental twist.

I was born in Cattolica and my clothes factory is nearby, so I am here at 
least two days a week. For me it is a little haven, away from the noisy crowds 
of the Adriatic coast.

If I want something light I have the freshly grilled tuna with vegetables. If 
I really feel like something special, I'll order the ëmezze maniche [literally: 
short sleeved pasta] or the sea bass with olives and potatoes. The sushi and 
sashimi are also delicious and if I have pudding it'll usually be the plate of 
different ice creams mixed with fruits and caramel.

At lunchtime I don't touch alcohol, but in the evening I always have a glass 
of white wine. My favourite is from a producer in Friulli called Josko Gravner, 
which is quite hard to come by. The owner produces it in small quantities and 
he matures it in earthenware containers rather than in wooden barrels as most 
vineyards do today.

The setting of the restaurant is wonderful - it is by the swimming pool and 
beyond that is the sea.'

 Vicolo Santa Lucia 
Carducci 76 
Viale Carducci 76 
47841 Cattolica 
Italy 
00 39 0541 954677 

Beach shacks to restaurants - great alfresco eating places in Britain 
Compiled by Sue Webster and Viola Fort

 Baywatch Beach Restaurant 

 The Waterfront, St Helens, Isle of Wight 

01983 873259; www.bay-watch.co.uk <http://www.bay-watch.co.uk> 

'Pretty posh', but a beach cafe nonetheless during the day, Baywatch morphs 
into a restaurant at night - with 12 large tables outside. Its fabulous setting 
is the main draw: on the water's edge, with Bembridge Harbour behind and the 
briny ahead. The lunch menu is fishy and wholesome: crab soup, crab and Gruyère 
tartlet, crispy salmon and dill fishcakes are popular. Later on, sip Pimm's and 
tuck into vast halibut steaks or a whole lobster for £19. August is the month 
when the lowest tides of the year allow an annual trek across the causeway - 
just for fun and a glass of chilled white wine.

 Beach houses from £230 per week, dinner from £25 a head. 

 Porthgwidden Beach Cafe 

 Porthgwidden, St Ives, Cornwall 

01736 796791; www.porthminstercafe.co.uk <http://www.porthminstercafe.co.uk> 

Any bar you can attend barefoot has something special about it, and this 
Cornish eatery in a sheltered cove is proba bly closer to beach heaven than any 
other spot in the UK - apart from its sister establishment at Porthminster, of 
course. Being less well known, however, has its advantages. It's less fancy, 
yet has the same dazzling outlook of sea and sky. The Moroccan-style terrace 
(think Berber-striped cushions) has 28 tables and looks over the beach in front 
of it. There's icy beer and ciabatta sandwiches at lunch, Spanish tapas and 
Moroccan tasting plates. More ambitious cooking and a decent wine list 
transforms the cafe into a delectable spot for Cornish sardines, tiger prawns 
with tomatoes, garlic and basil, tagines and paellas in the evenings.

 Dinner from £20 per head. 

 The Beach Hut Bistro & Bar 

 Watergate Bay, Cornwall 

01637 860877; www.watergatebay.co.uk <http://www.watergatebay.co.uk> 

A popular surfer's hangout in Newquay serving bar snacks such as duck wraps 
and mussels downstairs, and grown-up fish dishes upstairs. Both floors have 
outside tables overlooking Watergate Bay. It's part of the Extreme Academy, and 
is situated next to the sports school so diners can watch the action. 
Kite-surfing anyone?

 Sandwiches on beach £2.50, dinner in the restaurant £50 per head. 

 The Terrace Bar 

 Island Hotel, Tresco, Isles of Scilly 

01720 422883 

Fresh Tresco lobster caught the same morning is served on a sun-bleached 
wooden terrace. Set in the hotel's sub-tropical gardens, nudging the shoreline, 
this is one of the most idyllic alfresco locations in the UK. The emphasis is 
on local fish and shellfish while salads, sandwiches and simple pasta dishes 
make up the rest of the summer menu.

 Rooms from £117 per person (half board), dinner from £37.50. 

 Morgans 

 Somerset Place, Swansea, Wales 

01792 484848; www.morganshotel.co.uk <http://www.morganshotel.co.uk> 

A fitting reincarnation of the old Swansea Port Authority building, Morgans 
hotel is a cool refurb of handsome Edwardiana, complete with two restaurants 
and a trend-setting bar. If you want to sit out on 'the decking', overlooking 
the beach, you have to order from Plimsoll Cafe Bar (matching footwear 
optional) not the restaurant. The menu includes warm salmon and asparagus 
salad, oriental stir-fry and almond soup with crispy pancetta.

 Two courses £10, three course £15. 

 Combe House Hotel 

 Holford, Somerset 

01278 741382 

Nestled in the foothills of the Quantocks, this pretty hotel has tables by the 
mill stream, and dishes feature much of the garden's fresh produce. Work up an 
appetite with a walk through the hills, which have views over to Wales, or play 
tennis on their hard court.

 Rooms from £45, dinner from £25. 

 Barge Inn 

 Seend, Melksham, Wiltshire 01380 828 230 

Good pub grub by the Kennet and Avon canal. The straightforward menu offers 
sandwiches, as well as ploughman's lunches and, typically, whitebait with 
tartare sauce and hearty steak and kidney pies. Watch the boats pass by from 
the well-kept waterside garden, but book, as it gets busy during summer 
weekends.

 Sandwiches from £3,50, pie from £5.50. 

 The Leatherne Bottel 

 Goring-on-Thames, Berkshire 

01491 872667; www.leathernebottel.co.uk <http://www.leathernebottel.co.uk> 

Part of the pleasure is the arrival: a single track road delivers you onto a 
beautifully peaceful stretch of the Thames where the river is only disturbed by 
the frisky ducks and the occasional passing barge. Owner Annie Bonnet presides 
over her restaurant - transformed from a bikers' pub over 15 years ago - with 
care and good humour. Sit on the terrace, and try the foie gras or crab for 
starter, and some lovely fresh fish for mains. Walk off your meal with the 15 
minute walk along the bridleway to the village.

 Special lunch menu and set dinner at £23.50 

 The Bell Inn 

 Aldworth, Reading, Berkshire 

01635 578272 

This small village pub is reputed to have been in the same family for over 200 
years, and seems to have changed little since then. The landlord serves simple 
but delicious food: hot crusty rolls filled with crabmeat, salt beef with 
horseradish or smoked salmon - all washed down with a pint of ale. In summer, 
the sounds of village cricket games float over the beer garden hedge.

 Sandwiches from £1.50. 

 Sandgate Hotel 

 8-9 Wellington Terrace, The Esplanade, Sandgate, Kent 

01303 220444; www.sandgatehotel.com <http://www.sandgatehotel.com> 

Just yards away from the pebble beach, residents of the Kentish coast flock 
here at weekends to drink cocktails in the main bar. Classics are popular, but 
the thirst for new flavours is such that the hotel's latest cocktail list 
includes an innovation by each member of staff. Steak sandwiches, mussels and 
fries, lamb burgers and chips pad out the bar menu, while the dining room 
offers smart European cuisine. Crossover point is the seafood platter, served 
in the restaurant or on one of the frequent weekend barbecues (weather 
permitting). It's a squeeze to get onto the terrace, but do try, because the 
sunsets are amazing.

 Rooms from £65, dinner from £35 per head. 

 The Three Horseshoes 

 High Street, Madingley, 

Cambridgeshire 

01954210221;  www.huntsbridge.com/thethreehorseshoes.html 
<http://www.huntsbridge.com/thethreehorseshoes.html> 

A small thatched inn with a conservatory restaurant and a very pretty garden 
that backs on to the village cricket green. The menu includes such treats as 
Portland crab salad with grilled baby leeks, dandelion, radicchio and saffron 
aïoli. Dinner from £30 per head .

 Saltwater 

 The Cornerhouse, Forman Street, Nottingham 

0115 924 2664; www.saltwater-restaurant.com 
<http://www.saltwater-restaurant.com> 

Eat lunch with Nottingham's most fashionable on the sprawling roof terrace of 
this chic restaurant and lounge bar overlooking the city. Order crab brulee 
with tomato salsa, followed by blackened red sea bream with couscous. Red meat 
is hung for at least 28 days, making for a memorable steak.

 Three-course menu from £12 . 

 The Lemon Tree 

 268 Woodstock Road, Oxford 

01865 311936; www.thelemontreeoxford.co.uk 
<http://www.thelemontreeoxford.co.uk> 

With a lovely walled garden and patio, the Lemon Tree is the perfect place to 
enjoy an excellent long lunch of grilled tuna or salad of duck confit, followed 
by strawberry and rose wine jelly. Prepare to linger over a post-prandial 
cocktail and still be sitting there when dinner time rolls round.

 Dinner from £35 per head, set lunch 12.95 for three courses. 

 The Trout 

 Godstow Road, Lower Wolvercote, Oxfordshire 

01865 302071 

A very popular riverside pub that has numbered Lewis Caroll and Colin Dexter 
among its drinkers. Food is straightforward and unfussy, such as mixed grill, 
barbecued chicken and plenty of cod and trout. The main draw in summer is the 
riverside terrace, which has lovely views, but can get very busy.

 Dinner from £12.50 per head. 

 The Stagg Inn & Restaurant 

 Titley, Kington, Herefordshire 

01544 230 221; www.thestagg.co.uk <http://www.thestagg.co.uk> 

The first British pub to be awarded a Michelin Star, the Stagg Inn strikes a 
balance between fine food and relaxed surroundings. In winter, visitors can eat 
beside the log fire in the dining room, but go in summer when the garden is 
open. The chef uses local produce from the surrounding farms and estates, as 
well as herbs from the garden.

 Dinner from £32.50 per head. 

 Oloroso 

 33 Castle Street, Edinburgh 

0131 226 7614; www.oloroso.co.uk <http://www.oloroso.co.uk> 

Well-known for its fantastic roof terrace, visitors can sip a cocktail while 
taking in a panoramic sweep that includes both the Firth of Forth and Edinburgh 
Castle. Try seared seabass with butternut squash puree, chicory and white bean 
sauce, and roast venison with confit savoy cabbage and tarragon mash. There is 
also a good menu of bar snacks for those who can't get a table; booking is 
advised as it gets very busy.

 Dinner from £40 per head. 

 Applecross Inn 

 Applecross, Wester Ross, Highlands 

01520 744 262; www.applecross.uk.com/inn.htm 
<http://www.applecross.uk.com/inn.htm> 

Situated on the west coast of Scotland, this homely pub has wonderful sea 
views. The food is taken very seriously by owner Judith Fish, with plenty of 
local seafood as well as highland beef and venison from the Applecross Estate. 
Try half a dozen local oysters or roast confit haunch of rabbit with chive mash 
and onion gravy, and a raspberry cranachan to finish (a Scottish pud made with 
oatmeal, cream and a good slug of whisky.) Off the beaten track, but well worth 
a detour.

 Dinner about £25 per head . 

 Bohemia 

 Green Street, St Helier, Jersey 

01534 880588; www.bohemiajersey.com <http://www.bohemiajersey.com> 

Jersey's answer to London nightlife, Bohemia's bar caters to the champagne 
cocktail set. While there is a restaurant (below the Beaufort Hotel) serving 
sophisticated French cuisine, if you want to sit on the terrace it has to be 
lunch (or brunch at the weekends) and you will have to order from the snack 
menu, which is not a major drawback: it includes roast tomato soup, foie gras 
parfait, poached eggs benedict, and smoked salmon platters. If you are in the 
mood, order the bestselling cocktail, Cherry Lips, a sweet sledgehammer of 
Polish cherry vodka, cherry brandy, orange juice and champagne, no doubt a 
lucrative deal on the tax free isle.

 Dinner about £50 per head. 

 Cafe du Moulin 

 Rue de Quanterain, St Pierre du Bois, Guernsey 

01481 265944; www.cafedumoulin.com <http://www.cafedumoulin.com> 

Reasonably priced formal dining and an idyllic garden setting from one of 
Guernsey's best restaurants. Christophe Vincent, who runs both the restaurant 
and the accompanying apartments, was awarded a Michelin star in 2002. The Late 
Summer Menu is bursting with local seafood and produce. There is also a Menu 
Gourmand featuring onion ice cream with balsamic vinegar, and roasted Bresse 
pigeon with girolles and baby onion. Apartments from £250 per week, 
three-course lunch £14.50, dinner from £50 per head.

Top 40: part 2 
<http://www.observer.co.uk/foodmonthly/story/0,9950,1275944,00.html>
 