
Porthmeor Beach Cafe, St Ives

If indeed the much-bandied-about concept of "cool Cornwall" exists, the 
Porthmeor is a good place to come looking for it. This beachside terrace in 
front of Tate St Ives offers a kind of casual eating that fills the gap between 
the seriously priced offerings of Fifteen,Porthminster Beach Cafe 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2006/apr/08/travelfoodanddrink.foodanddrink.unitedkingdom>
 et al, and the cheap but not always terribly cheerful fish 'n' chip shops of 
old. Breakfasts are big here – scrambled eggs with Cornish crab and crème 
fraiche, buttermilk pancakes, toasted artisan Vicky's Bread.

Lunches are nicely presented croques, simple grilled local fish and a 
selection of 20 tapas that steer clear of Cornish cliché (courgette, sweetcorn 
and dill fritters with chilli jam and whipped feta, say, or local duck breast 
with apple, fennel and beetroot caramel). The dessert tapas (£3 each) are a 
stroke of genius in the setting – who wants a heap of sticky toffee pudding on 
a sunny beach day? Not many. Who, on the other hand, wants a mini strawberry 
tart and a petite rhubarb fool with ginger crumbs? Most of the beach, it turns 
out.
• Mains £4.25-£9.95, tapas £2-£7. Open Easter until beginning Nov, 8am-last 
food orders 9pm daily, no bookings for outside seating. 01736 793366,
porthmeor-beach.co.uk/cafe <http://www.porthmeor-beach.co.uk/cafe>

Chapel Porth Cafe, near Saint Agnes
 Photograph: Alamy 
All of Cornwall likes clotted cream but nowhere consumes it with quite the 
determination of this open-air cafe near Chapel Porth beach (pictured), where 
you'll even find it subtly worked into your sandwich. It's not much to look at 
– a small hatch with prosaic picnic tables in a beachside car park – but it has 
found fame beyond its dimensions for its long-standing speciality, the 
"Hedgehog": a cone of clotted cream ice-cream, slathered in clotted cream, then 
rolled in a bowl of chopped honey-roasted hazelnuts (£2.95).

There's also a family of "croques" for under a fiver – large toasted granary 
baguettes oozing melted cheese that are devoured in urgent silence by the 
post-surf crew. Our croque rosemary was piled high with chunky-cut mushrooms 
cooked in clotted cream and garlic, and topped with hot cheese and flecks of 
rosemary – not subtle but certainly satisfying. Join the wetsuited and booted 
at the benches or take your food a few paces to the beach – a pristine, 
undeveloped spot cut between high, heather-hued cliffs.
• Open Fri, Sat, Sun 10am-5pm year-round, daily Easter-end Oct. 01872 552487 

Relish, Wadebridge
 Relish, Wadebridge 
A double-act with the chic deli next door, this cheery independent cafe 
occupies a quiet courtyard in Wadebridge. The menu is peppered with desirable 
deli items – apple and mustard seed chutney, fig balsamic vinegar on salads, an 
array of fine cheeses and charcuterie – plus miniature tins of slow-rise, 
organic Vicky's Bread, Cornwall's best artisan baker. One look at the monthly 
changing coffee board will clue you into this cafe's raison d'être – the 
purveyance of exceptional coffee.

Owner-barista Hugo, one-time champion in the UK Barista Championships, works 
the espresso machine, turning out strong, smooth, complex coffees (from £1.40). 
Ideal for a jump-start espresso and peanut butter cookie before tackling the 
Camel Trail to Padstow, which you can pick up from just around the corner.
• Breakfasts £2.50-£10.95, lunch £4.95-£8.95, open 9am-5pm Tue-Sat. Foundry 
Court, 01208 814214,relishwadebridge.co.uk <http://www.relishwadebridge.co.uk>

Cornish Arms, St Merryn 
 Photograph: David Griffen 
A few years back when Rick Stein took over tenancy of this village pub in St 
Merryn – several miles from the Stein HQ of Padstow – it could have seemed 
incongruous. But the Stein brand keeps a surprisingly low profile here and the 
Cornish Arms, licensed by the St Austell Brewery, still feels like a proper 
pub, albeit a very busy one with unusually good food. Getting your hands on a 
decent main course for under a tenner in and around the gastronomically 
ascendant Camel Estuary is usually an exercise in restrictive ordering but here 
the menu has ample pub classics in this price range: sausages and mash, 5oz 
real beef burger, scampi basket with chips, ham, egg and chips, a pint of 
prawns.

Black and white photos of drinkers of yore, curry nights, a pool table and 
bottles of Sarson's vinegar also keep things moderately real but this is still 
Stein, which means that your crab salad will be super fresh and dressed with 
respect, staff are on the case, and the wine list is well above average village 
pub standards.
• Open 11.30am-11pm daily. No bookings. 01841 520288, rickstein.com 
<http://www.rickstein.com/The-Cornish-Arms.html>

St Kew Harvest Farm Shop, near Wadebridge 
 St Kew Harvest Shop 
Food awareness is high on the agenda at this farm shop and cafe, and all 
sourcing has been painstakingly undertaken. Most of the dairy products come 
from Helsett Farm, the only single-farm organic dairy in Cornwall; beef is from 
the particularly tasty miniature Dexter cow; and veg, in season, is plucked 
from the garden outside. The owners are also keen proponents of the Real Bread 
Campaign, whose "Loaf Mark" denotes the use of all-natural ingredients and a 
fermentation process of at least four hours (here it's more like 12).

The low-key cafe, which looks out over the market garden and roaming ducks, is 
reopening at Easter with the addition of a new wood-fired oven, which will be 
taking care of all the baked goods, including a range of pizzas (from £7.50), 
scones for the cream teas (£4.75 with tea or coffee), ciabattas and even 
meringues. The moist, rich gluten-free brownie (£2.25), made with almond flour, 
is worthy of note (other gluten-free options available but not from a 
gluten-free kitchen). Conveniently located on the Atlantic Highway, AKA the 
A39, leading to Bude.
• Cafe open 11am-4pm Mon-Sat. 01208 841818

Blas Burgerworks, St Ives
 Blas Burgerworks, St Ives 
Arguably Cornwall's best cheap eat can be had at this gourmet burger company 
occupying the tiniest of premises in St Ives – and setting an example of how to 
do one thing (well, five if you count the chicken burger, tofu burger, halloumi 
stack and black bean burgers) and do it very well. The £10 "real deal" gets you 
a juicy, smoky char-grilled burger, chips and a drink (including beer or wine) 
– you can't go wrong. Seating is at communal tables but fret not – everyone's 
far too busy negotiating the burgers to worry about making conversation.

Intent on reinventing the maligned burger van, Blas is hitting the road this 
summer with Blas STREET, inspired by the gourmet food-trucking movement in the 
US. Look out for Blas at festivals and events around Cornwall, as well as 
campsites, beaches and car parks. Blas recently became the only restaurant in 
Cornwall to gain a three-star rating from the Sustainable Restaurant 
Association (SRA).
• Open 6pm-9.30pm Mon-Sat year-round, noon-9.30pm daily school holidays, no 
bookings for groups under six. 01736 797272,blasburgerworks.co.uk 
<http://www.blasburgerworks.co.uk>

Carnewas Tea Rooms, near St. Eval
 Photograph: Alamy 
Few concessions are made to the nation's new-found foodie fetishism here – 
it's all about the post-walk mug of tea, simple slabs of cake, rustic toasties, 
rolls, jackets and cream teas. Considering it is but a small, simple room on 
top of a Cornish cliff, this is just as it should be. The scones are baked 
daily in the little open kitchen – pleasingly fresh and light on our visit – 
and served with strawberry jam and clotted cream for a mere £2 (£4.80 with a 
pot of tea for one). In all but the most challenging of conditions, walkers 
keep hats on and take their tray out to the tea garden to make the most of the 
Atlantic breezes and open views.

There is, we have to admit, another major motivation to visit: the tea garden 
is a minute's walk away from Cornwall's most terrific panorama (pictured): the 
jagged stacks of the Bedruthan Steps from above, with the headlands of the 
north coast layering up scenically beyond.
• Rolls and toasties £3.90-£5.45, jacket potatoes from £4.70. Open 
10.30am-5.30pm daily Easter-end Oct, hours vary in winter; call for details. 
01637 860701

Scarlet Wines, Hayle
 Scarlet Wines, Cornwall 
The owner of this independent wine merchant-cum-deli-cafe is on a crusade to 
steer people away from boring supermarket wine to discover small producers and 
lesser-known wine regions (Lebanese viticulture was in focus on our last 
visit). The same principles apply to the food in the adjoining cafe, which 
appears on a short but carefully considered menu. The half a dozen light 
lunches – edging out of the £10 bracket – might feature leeky Welsh rarebit 
with toasted walnuts and pickled mushrooms, crispy squid with lemon, chilli and 
garlic, or a rump steak sandwich with blue cheese and mushroom sauce. Quality 
takes precedent over quantity – you won't get a mound of salad but your 
collection of leaves will be perky and beautifully dressed.

A thorough exploration of the wine shop (any bottle bought in the shop can be 
consumed in the cafe for a fee of £5) may require more elasticity in the wallet 
but owner Jon remains passionate about the wares at the cheaper end. The wood 
burner is sparked on colder days, which, combined with the hot-red walls and 
the inevitable consumption of fine wines, should ensure you leave with a warm 
glow.
• Breakfast 9am-11.30am daily, lunch noon-3pm, dinner 6-9pm Fri and Sat in 
winter plus other days in summer. 01736 753696,scarlet-wines.co.uk 
<http://www.scarlet-wines.co.uk> 

Philp's Famous Pasties, Hayle
 Philp’s Famous Pasties, Cornwall 
Discussion over the best pasties in Cornwall has always been impassioned. And 
the establishment of theCornish Pasty Association 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/feb/23/cornish-pasties-eu-cornwall>
 – the body that applied for and, in 2011, won PGI (Protected Geographical 
Indication) status for the Cornish pasty in Europe – plus the proliferation of 
awards, festivals and ultimately pasties, has served to widen the debate. In 
Cornwall, we all like the neat idea of finding the finest possible exemplar – 
D-shaped and crimped on the side but also perfectly peppered and evenly filled 
with meat (not less than 12.5% to be specific).

If you've even a passing appetite for the debate, make a pasty pilgrimage to 
Philp's Famous Pasties in Hayle, a historic family bakery shifting thousands on 
a daily basis. Join the queue snaking out the door and, hot paper bag secured, 
head for a bench on the quay. Attack the absurdly abundant "large" only if you 
have no further plans for the day; the "standard" is amply proportioned. And 
whatever you do, don't forget a drink – pasties are thirsty work.
• Steak pasties £2.45-£4.95. Open 8.30am-6pm daily. 1 East Quay, 01736 
753343/755661,philpsbakery.co.uk <http://www.philpsbakery.co.uk>

Godrevy Cafe, Gwithian, Hayle
 Godrevy Cafe, Gwithian, Hayle, Cornwall 
The food at this beach chalet in the dunes hits all the right notes for its 
location: simple, fresh, attractive, affordable. Beloved of locals for those 
reasons, it is often packed, so prepare to wait both to order at the counter 
and to receive your food. But when it arrives, it's always vibrant, generously 
sized and lovingly prepared in the tiny kitchen. Our Mexican wrap (£7.65) was a 
pleasure from beginning to end: the chunks of chicken had been thoroughly 
marinated, the salad was crispy, the home-made salsa tangy. The cake cabinet 
courts you while you wait in the queue with thickly layered apricot flapjacks, 
impeccable victoria sponge, brownies, pastries and outsized cookies (from £2) – 
resistance is futile. There are seats indoors and out but the sweet spot is 
undoubtedly the top deck with views over the swell and the grassy dunes.
• Brunches from £6, lunches from £5.10. Open 10am-5pm daily winter (weekends 
only in Jan), longer hours in summer, no bookings. 01736 757999,
godrevycafe.co.uk <http://www.godrevycafe.co.uk/>. Located in a chargeable 
National Trust car park

Ismay Atkins blogs about Cornwall at pastiesandcream.com 
<http://www.pastiesandcream.com>

Know any great affordable places to eat in north Cornwall? Add your 
recommendation in the comments below
 