
Napier Cottage, Isleornsay

This purpose-built luxury B&B opened in 2011 and has panoramic views over the 
Sound of Sleat to Beinn Sgritheall and the Knoydart peninsula. Christine and 
Ian fell in love with the spot so bought the plot and employed local architects 
and builders to create their dream home. The three rooms are plush and 
contemporary with tartan trim. There's underfloor heating, a sleek, 
Scandinavian woodburning stove in the lounge, a telescope in the garden room 
for spotting dolphins and seals in the waves far below, and a path weaving down 
to the shore. You can join them for an evening meal – or Michelin-starred
Kinloch Lodge <http://www.kinloch-lodge.co.uk/>, Lady Claire Macdonald's hotel 
and cookery school, is a few minutes' drive down the road.
• 01471 833460, napiercottage.co.uk <http://www.napiercottage.co.uk>. Doubles 
from £90 B&B

Rubha Phoil Eco campsite, Sleat
 Rubha Phoil Eco campsite is close to Armadale pier and the ferry to the 
mainland 
For a spectacular clifftop pitch with stellar environmental credentials, the 
Rubha Phoil Eco campsite close to Armadale pier and the ferry to the mainland 
takes some beating. There are just 10 pitches scattered through this magical 
16-acre wooded glen and permaculture garden on the lush, green Sleat peninsula 
to the south of the island, dubbed the Garden of Skye. Children will love the 
campfire and cave down on the beach, collecting eggs from the free-range hens 
(with honesty box) and the forest garden with its woodland walk winding through 
herbs and vegetables.
• 01471 844700, skye-permaculture.org.uk <http://skye-permaculture.org.uk/>. 
£7.50pp per night, under 16s free, 25% price reduction if you travel by public 
transport

Greshornish House, Edinbane

 Greshornish House 
As you wind your way down the single-track lane to Greshornish House, 
cartoon-style road signs warn you to "WATCH THAT LAMB!" This elegant listed 
building in 10 acres of wooded grounds on the Greshornish peninsula dates back 
to 1740. The secluded lochside setting, with its restored wall garden and hens 
scuttling across the croquet lawn, is picture-perfect. Inside it's all 
old-world charm, with antiques scattered around, log fires, dark panelling, a 
billiards room, two pianos, a bar with 40 single malts and gourmet dinners by 
candlelight. The eight bedrooms are named after Scottish islands. Jura was once 
the laird's bedroom, with loch view and roll-top bath, while Islay has a 
romantic four-poster and views towards Trotternish Ridge.
• 01470 582266, greshornishhouse.com <http://www.greshornishhouse.com>. 
Doubles from £80 B&B (usually a two-night minimum); three-course dinner £38, 
four courses £45

The Glenview, Culnacnoc
 Glenview 
This little whitewashed croft on the Trotternish peninsula, now a restaurant 
with rooms, offers vintage chic and a mouthwatering menu. Young owners, Kirsty 
(Scottish) and chef Simon (Australian) have created a gorgeous gourmet bolthole 
on the wild north coast. There are just five rooms full of quirky touches: 
baskets of wool and knitting needles for guests with idle fingers, old leather 
suitcases, junk shop plunder – and no TVs, just retro radios. The cosy lounge 
has a woodburner, the award-winning restaurant (tongue-and-groove walls and 
original wooden floors), two AA rosettes, mismatched china and a daily changing 
menu of fresh, seasonal local produce.
• 01470 562248, glenviewskye.co.uk <http://www.glenviewskye.co.uk>. Doubles 
from £90 B&B, from £160 for B&B and three-course dinner

Woodbine Guesthouse, Uig
 Woodbine Guesthouse, Uig 
Andi and Vicki, a young Swiss/Scottish couple, were always going to wind up by 
the sea. They met working as diving instructors on the Great Barrier Reef, ran 
sailing holidays on their yacht in the Med, and now run a five-bedroom 
guesthouse perched on the hill above Uig Bay on the Trotternish peninsula. 
Rooms are cosy and contemporary, with stripped wooden floors and sea views. 
They offer wildlife-watching boat trips – you might spot minke whales, puffins, 
seals and sea eagles – and a range of accommodation and activity packages: 
mountain bike hire, water-skiing, fishing trips, sea kayaking and guided or 
self-guided walking.
• 01470 542243, skyeactivities.co.uk <http://www.skyeactivities.co.uk>. 
Doubles from £64 B&B (two-night minimum in high season); two-night activity 
package £135pp including B&B, half-day boat trip and choice of kayaking, 
archery or cycling

The Croft Bunkhouse, Bothies and Wigwams, Portnalong
 The Croft 
You've a choice of bunkhouse, bothy or wigwam on this 12-acre croft on the 
wild west coast. The three heated wooden wigwams are the glamping option, built 
from sustainable sitka or Norway spruce grown in Scotland, and bedded into the 
treeless landscape. Inside they are snug and warm, with whitewashed walls, 
jaunty little curtains, radio/CD player, microwave, fridge and kettle. From 
here it's just a short schlep to go hiking in the magnificent Cuillin mountains.
• 01478 640463, skyehostels.com <http://www.skyehostels.com>. Wigwams sleep up 
to five (four adults maximum), from £25 for one person to £60 for for four/five

Skyewalker Hostel, Portnalong

 Skyewalker Hostel, Portnalong 
The award-winning Skywalker Hostel on the Minginish peninsula on Skye's west 
coast is handy for hiking in the brooding Cuillins. You can sing for your 
supper – or rather a cosy twin room – with the musical instruments scattered 
around for the regular folk sessions. Lisa and Brian converted the old wooden 
schoolhouse six years ago and the design is bright and eclectic, think retro 
school desks, a funky red kitchen, a clear geodesic dome in the garden for 
stargazing and chill-out time and a giant chess set on the lawn. The loos are 
lovely – white tongue-and-groove and fresh flowers in the cubicles – and there 
are monsoon showers in the bathrooms.
• 01478 640250, skyewalkerhostel.com <http://www.skyewalkerhostel.com>. Dorm 
beds from £16

Wilmar Bed & Breakfast, Carbost
 Wilmar Bed & Breakfast, Carbost 
The enticing smell of bread baking is one way of telling a good B&B. Marcella 
not only bakes her own bread (and makes the marmalade and plum jam to put on 
it) she sells it around the island and runs two-day sourdough courses. The old 
1920s low-slung croft house is on the shore of Loch Harport. From Wilmar's 
jetty you can spot dolphins, seals, sea eagles, deer – and, if you're very 
quiet, otters. The two rooms, Edinburgh and Glasgow (with its iron bedstead) 
are charming and cosy, and the guest lounge has an original wooden floor, log 
fire and shelves crammed with maps and books on Skye. Just down the road is the 
Talisker Whisky Distillery, while if you fancy a dram and a tune, the inn in 
Carbost has regular live music.
• 01478 640251/07920 112878, wilmarbedandbreakfast.com 
<http://www.wilmarbedandbreakfast.com>. Doubles from £80 B&B (usually a 
two-night minimum); weekend sourdough course £120pp (not including 
accommodation, dates on the website)

Ardvasar Hotel, Sleat 
 Ardvasar Hotel, Sleat 
This pretty, little 19th-century hotel, in the tiny waterfront village of 
Ardvasar, has 10 contemporary tartan-clad rooms. Those at the front look out 
over the Sound of Sleat and sunrise over the mountains of Knoydart on the 
mainland. Or you could splash out on the four-poster room at the back, peaceful 
and romantic with woodland views. There are around 30 malts to sample in the 
bar, sandy beaches nearby, walks from the door to the Point of Sleat and, a few 
minutes down the lane,Armadale Castle and the Museum of the Isles 
<http://www.clandonald.com/>.
• 01471 844223, ardvasarhotel.com <http://www.ardvasarhotel.com>. Doubles from 
£130 B&B

Glenbrittle Campsite, Carbost
 Photograph: Alamy 
The campsite at Glenbrittle gives you the best of both worlds. It has a wild 
camping feel – one of the joys of camping in Scotland is that the whole country 
is essentially one giant campsite – but with a small shower block and handy 
shop, stocking fresh and canned food and climbing equipment. This site, down a 
single track lane on the island's wild west coast, hunkers beneath one of the 
most imposing and forbidding mountain ranges in the country, the Holy Grail of 
climbers and Munro-baggers: the Cuillins. Serious climbers make a pilgrimage 
here, but for those who just want to kick back and relax (midges allowing), the 
pitches peppered around the field are picturesque and private. You can take a 
dip in the nearby Fairy Pools or comb the beach for mussels to cook on the 
campfire.
• 01478 640404, dunvegancastle.com 
<http://www.dunvegancastle.com/content/default.asp?page=s20> Adults £7 per 
night, children £4.50, "backpackers" £6; day fishing permits £15. Open 1 
April-30 September
 