
The Wheel House, Falmouth

This modest, back-street shellfish cafe has been open less than a year and 
already it's a Falmouth institution (the monthly paella nights are booked up 
until February). The decor is retro living room with stripped floors, junk-shop 
tables, candles and fairy lights; and the menu is beautifully simple: mussels, 
scallops, crab or prawns (and lobster and native oysters when available). All 
the fish is Cornish, all harbour-fresh and served in a Portuguese-style 
cataplama (a clam-like metal dish) with chive butter, lemon, skinny chips, a 
side salad and a choice of two house wines (red or white). Dishes are designed 
to share (mussels for two come at £11.95). The scallops (six for £9) are to die 
for. And you get a pinny and a set of crackers with your make-a-mess whole crab.
• Open Wed-Sat, evenings only, booking essential. Upton Slip, 01326 318 050

Harbour Lights, Falmouth
 Harbour Lights, Falmouth, Cornwall 
The ubiquitous Mr Stein brought his fish and chip formula to Falmouth harbour 
a couple of years ago, but Harbour Lights is still the local favourite. The 
award-winning chippy not only does a fine fish fry-up, but also uses 
sustainable fish, cooked in sustainable palm oil (or, in the near future, 
British rape-seed), served in bio-degradable packaging, with Cornish-spud 
chips. Cod roe was recently struck off the menu ("fish eggs are the ocean's 
future," explains owner Pete Fraser); ditto endangered skate. What you can eat, 
with a free conscience, is Icelandic cod, haddock from the north-east Arctic or 
Cornish mackerel, pollock and whiting. Five pence from all restaurant hot-drink 
prices goes to the Marine Conservation Society.
• Takeaway cod and chips, £5.85. Arwenack Street, 01326 316934, hlfish.co.uk 
<http://www.hlfish.co.uk>

Miss Peapod's Kitchen Cafe, Penryn
 Retro crockery at Miss Peapod's Kitchen Cafe, Penryn, Cornwall 
Under the wind turbines of Penryn's Jubilee Wharf (one of the UK's greenest 
buildings), this breezy waterfront cafe is part coffee bar, part creche, part 
social club (there's free wi-fi, newspapers, a children's play area and the 
occasional meditation class). The decor is light wood and lime green Formica 
and the food is fresh (sometimes foraged), wholesome, organic, mostly local and 
served on retro crockery. Try a homemade beefburger (or beanburger) with 
focaccia roll, beef tomato salad, herb yogurt and chips (£9.45) or spicy 
free-range chicken wrap with salsa and salad (£6.95). There's a decent kids' 
menu, sticky cakes and, outside, a generous deck with views of Falmouth harbour 
from the Penryn River.
• Doorstep sandwiches from £4.75, breakfast from £4.25, daily specials from 
£5.95. Open Mon-Thurs and Sun 10am-4pm and Fri-Sat 10am-12.30am (live music in 
the evenings). Jubilee Wharf, 01326 374 424,misspeapod.co.uk 
<http://www.misspeapod.co.uk>

Sarah's Pasty Shop, Looe
 Sarah's Pasty Shop, Falmouth, Cornwall 
Hard to pick a winner among the butchers and bakers that turn out the county's 
best "oggies", but this tiny Looe harbour favourite gets my vote. After 20 
years behind the counter, Sarah is now retired, but daughter Lucy Taylor 
continues to run the family bakery – turning out deliciously fattening 
oven-fresh pies and pasties, packed with flavour and good quality ingredients 
(like juicy chunks of Cornish beef). I haven't tried the veggie pasties (spiced 
chick-pea and lentil), the gluten-free, the lamb, the 'breakfast pasty' (bacon, 
sausage, egg, bean and mushroom at £2.75). But the more familiar traditionals 
(small, medium or large) are made, as they should be, with beef skirt and a bit 
of peppery swede, and wrapped in a rich lardy pastry with a side crimp. I ate 
mine on the beach – alone. Nothing else mattered. Worth noting, perhaps, that 
Dawn French ordered 50 of them for her 50th birthday party.
• Pasties from £1.70. Buller Street, 01503 263 973. Other pasties worth 
queuing for include the Horse and Jockey in Helston (41 Meneage Street, 01326 
563 534) and the Village Butcher at Mylor Bridge (Trevellan Road, near 
Falmouth, 01326 373 713)

Polpeor Cafe, Lizard Point
 Photograph: Alamy 
It looks like a standard greasy spoon, but this steamy little tea room perched 
on the cliff-top at Lizard Point has A-list views and a terrace where you can 
sit on plastic chairs in a salty wind watching boats rock around the headland 
into Falmouth Bay; plus a big, hearty menu of home-cooked food. Main courses 
include standard cafe fare (egg and chips, lasagne, steak and kidney pie), 
local-crab salads, a "luxury" fish pie (with vegetables, at £9.80) and fish of 
the day; plus home-made puddings, cream teas and cakes. Work up an appetite 
with a brisk walk – it's half a mile from Lizard village and 500 metres to 
Lizard Lighthouse.
• Main dishes from £7.50. Open every dat except Christmas Day. 01326 290 939

Sam's, Fowey
 Sam's, Fowey, Cornwall 
The decor is not what you'd expect of a 13th-century merchant's house (loud 
concoction of pink flock wallpaper, green paint and 1960s pop memorabilia), but 
this veteran bistro-cafe-bar has a loyal following among Fowey River folk. The 
main attractions are the good-value Samburgers (chargrilled ground beef with 
toasted bun, salad and fries) and the chilled, anything goes vibe. The menu 
includes "Captain Fish's speciality" (basically fish, chips and mushy peas) and 
a choice of fishburgers (all at £9.95). They don't take bookings, so get there 
early (or be prepared to hang out in the upstairs lounge bar while you wait for 
a table). In a former lifeboat station at nearby Polkerris, Sam's much younger 
sister,On the Beach <http://www.samsfowey.co.uk/index.php/onthebeach> 
(pictured), serves wood-fired pizzas (from £7.50) plus pricier seafood dishes 
and steaks (eat in or take away).
• Burgers, from £7.95. Open daily 12pm until late. Fore Street, 01726 832 273, 
samsfowey.co.uk <http://www.samsfowey.co.uk>

Muffins Tea Room, Lostwithiel
 Muffin's Tea Room, Lostwithiel, Cornwall Photograph: Unspecified 
In the so-called antiques capital of Cornwall, Lostwithiel, Muffins is part 
tea room, part Slow Food deli. Run by hands-on Keith and Lindsay Southgate, it 
specialises in proper Cornish produce - from Crellow chutneys and wildflower 
honey to Cornish apple juice, ales, sardines, sea salt, cheeses and Tregothnan 
teas (the Tregothnan Estate overlooks Falmouth Bay). Breakfast on Mr Kittow's 
bacon and free-range scrambled eggs (£5.50); lunch on ham and salami from Deli 
Farm Charcuterie (at Camelford) served with olives and crusty bread; or treat 
yourself to a classic cream tea: fresh-made scones, Boddington's jams (from 
Mevagissey) and Trewithen Dairy clotted cream. There's a pretty walled garden 
for warm days.
• Cream teas from £5.50 per person; Muffins tasting plate £7.50. 32 Fore 
Street, 01208 872 278,muffinsdeli.co.uk <http://www.muffinsdeli.co.uk>

Pandora Inn, Falmouth
 Pandora Inn, Cornwall 
You can't beat a proper Cornish seaside pub: flagstones, creaking timbers, 
tar-and-nicotine paintwork, log fires, a faint whiff of smugglers, brine and 
pilchards. For atmosphere, good food and Cornish ales, head forThe Blue Peter 
<http://www.thebluepeter.co.uk/> in Polperro (01503 272 743) or the Ship Inn 
<http://www.theshipinncornwall.co.uk> at Porthleven (01326 564 204). For great 
food, sail into the Pandora Inn – a thatched 13th-century St Austell Ales pub 
right on the water at Restronguet Creek (an inlet off Carrick Road and the Fal 
Estuary).
The pub was gutted by fire in March 2011, to the anguish of its many fans, but 
it reopened triumphantly less than a year later, with an extensively rebuilt 
upstairs restaurant, a painstakingly restored downstairs pub, and sparkling new 
exterior paintwork. The dinner menu is hardly budget, but you can eat light 
lunches (vintage cheddar ploughman's, caesar salad, baked potatoes) for under a 
tenner, and good, fresh fish and chips for just a shade over (£11).
• Light lunches from £6, Sunday carvery £10.50 per head. Restronguet Creek, 
Mylor Bridge, 01326 372 678,pandorainn.com <http://www.pandorainn.com>
This entry was amended on 13 March 2012 after the pub reopened

Lemon Street Market, Truro
 Photograph: Alamy 
In a modern building in the centre of Truro this place looks more shopping 
centre than indoor market. It has nothing to do with fruit (it's named after 
19th-century Truro merchant, William Lemon), but it smells so good (roasted 
coffee, grills, fresh-baked bread); and though there's a mix of retailers (a 
barbers, an eco florist, a couple of crafty gift shops), food is the thing. 
Upstairs, the Lander Gallery cafe; downstairs the Explorers cafe, the Larder 
deli (sandwiches, salad bar, gourmet picnics), Baker Tom (for artisan breads, 
as supplied to Fifteen Cornwall), and Halzephron Farm shop's herbs, potions and 
"living foods" (with lots of try-it samples). All in all, a great place to 
source Cornish goodies, and it's just around the corner from the Pannier Market 
on Lemon Quay.
• Lemon Street, 01872 271 733, lemonstreetmarket.co.uk 
<http://www.lemonstreetmarket.co.uk>

The Croust House, Helston
 Photograph: Alamy 
In a former milking parlour at Tregellast Barton Farm (home to Roskilly's 
yummy ice-cream), this rustic restaurant-cafe is just one element of an 
all-singing Cornish farm experience (40 acres, herds of Jersey cattle, cats, 
ducks, donkeys, chutneys, fudge, nature walks through the gentle Lizard 
Peninsula greenbelt). You can watch the milking, visit the ice-cream lab 
(during holidays only), or, better still, sit down to a big scoop of, say, 
Chocolate Brownie and Marshmallow (from £1.80). The pasties are home-cooked 
using Tregellast's own beef and the cream teas come with farmhouse jam and big 
dollops of the dairy's own clotted cream. Lunches include quiches, salads, 
daily specials (like balsamic-roasted vegetable lasagne) and beefy Sunday 
roasts (from £7.95). It looks a bit cafeteria, but you can eat outside or 
indoors by a cosy winter fire. Even the furniture is hand-made on the farm.
• Hot pasties, £3.20, specials £7.95. Open daily 11am-3pm Mon-Fri, 11am-5pm 
Sun and Sat. Tregellast Barton, St Keverne, 01326 281924,
http://roskillys.co.uk/croust <http://www.roskillys.co.uk>

This article was updated on 28 February 2012
 