
The Tories are coming under increasing pressure to return £440,000 in 
donations from the company owned by the fraudsterAsil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir>, following his conviction for 
stealing tens of millions of pounds.

Party officials appeared to reject the demands on Wednesday when they said the 
donations had been received "in good faith" from the firm Polly Peck and that 
officials would study the court's judgment before deciding how to proceed.

The tone of the Conservatives' statement was in marked contrast to a promise 
given in 1993 by Sir Norman Fowler, then party chairman, who said that the 
money would clearly be returned if it was proved it had been stolen.

On Wednesday, a Conservative spokesperson said the party would study the 
court's judgment but declined to confirm that they would repay the cash if it 
was stolen property.

"The Conservative party has no record of having received donations from Asil 
Nadir. Donations were received from Polly Peck companies more than 22 years 
ago; these were accepted in good faith from what was then considered to be a 
leading British company," the spokesman said.

An Old Bailey jury on Wednesday convicted the tycoon Nadir, 71, of 10 thefts 
from the former conglomerate totalling £29m. He was cleared of three charges.

Polly Peck International, once a large UK company, collapsed in 1990 after a 
Serious Fraud Office investigation.

Via his companies, Nadir is thought to have been one of the Conservative 
party's biggest benefactors underMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, a period in which 
party donations did not have to be publicly declared.

Accountants investigating Polly Peck found that a subsidiary had made a series 
of donations to the Conservative party between 1985 and 1990, seemingly without 
the knowledge of the company's board or shareholders.

Touche Ross, the administrators of Polly Peck, wrote a letter – widely 
reported four years ago – to the party's central office claiming that £365,000 
came from money defrauded from the Polly Peck empire.

"It is the contention of the administrator that Mr Nadir is liable to repay 
the sums concerned as a result of his fraud and/or breach of fiduciary duty 
and/or malfeasance as a director," the letter concluded. "I would urge you to 
return the donations to Polly Peck so that the creditors can at least obtain 
some small measure of compensation from this unfortunate affair."

The nine donations – three from Polly Peck International, of £25,000 each, and 
six from a subsidiary, Unipac Packaging Ltd, of between £50,000 and £80,000 – 
were paid into the Conservative Industrial Fund, according to reports, and 
spanned the period from October 1985 to March 1990.

An investigation into the affair by parliament in 1993 led to Fowler (now Lord 
Fowler) telling the home affairs select committee that the money would be 
returned should it emerge it had been stolen from shareholders.

Fowler said: "If it is proved that that money was stolen, then clearly that 
money will be returned. We have absolutely no intention of keeping money of 
that kind."

But he added it would be for lawyers to decide whether the money had been 
stolen. He defended the acceptance of the money, pointing out that Polly Peck 
had been a reputable company in the late 1980s and it was not possible to check 
the bona fides of each donor.

It also emerged during the select committee inquiry that the sums did not 
appear in the company's accounts.

Sir John Major <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-major>, prime 
minister at the time, had echoed Fowler's comments. "If it proves to have been 
dishonestly obtained and dishonestly remitted to us then of course we will 
return it," he told parliament.

The close relationship between the government of Thatcher and Nadir ended in 
the autumn of 1990. She was ousted from No 10 and Nadir was being chased by 
police, creditors and irate investors.

Michael Mates, the former Northern Ireland minister, was forced to resign from 
Major's government after it was discovered that he had given Nadir a watch 
inscribed "Don't let the buggers get you down" just before the latter fled 
prior to his trial in 1993.

The Conservative party's latest statement echoes comments made by Liberal 
Democrats after a court ruled that a £2.4m donation received from the convicted 
fraudster Michael Brown had been stolen.

After Brown was returned to a British jail in April, Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> told the BBC that the party 
would not be returning the cash or be seeking to compensate Brown's many 
victims.

Clegg said: "The money was received in good faith and all the controls, all 
the checks that should have been made were reasonably made by the Liberal 
Democrats at the time."

The Tories have, until now, gleefully taunted the Liberal Democrats over their 
decision to keep stolen money.

Simon Danczuk, Labour MP for Rochdale, said the Tories had to honour the 
promises of Fowler and Major. "Even John Major's government, which was mired in 
sleaze, knew they'd have to give back Asil Nadir's money if he was found guilty.

"David Cameron must honour the unequivocal promises the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> have made to repay the 
£440,000 they accepted from Nadir. If he doesn't, it will show the Tory party 
aren't serious when they claim they want to clean up politics."
 