
The Hilton Hotel in Petaling Jaya, Kuala Lumpur, can be seen from the local 
LRT station but negotiating your way through car parks, government complexes 
and Malaysian back streets to actually get there can be tricky.

It is a feeling familiar to Australian club officials who attended the draw 
for the 2017 Asian Champions League at the hotel on Tuesday. Brisbane Roar,
Western Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers> and Adelaide 
United know where they want to go but getting there is a different matter 
entirely.

Adelaide United to face reigning champions Jeonbuk in ACL group stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/adelaide-united-to-face-reigning-champions-jeonbuk-in-acl-group-stage>
For Brisbane, entering the group stage is the first priority. To do that, the 
team will take on either Singapore’s Tampines Rovers or Global from the 
Philippines, coached by former Crystal Palace goalkeeper John Burridge. The 
Queenslanders should be able to get through that initial play-off at home to 
book a one-off trip to China.

To get into Group E, Brisbane will have to win at Shanghai Shenhua. John 
Aloisi could ask Tim Cahill for some inside info about his former club, 
although the obvious tactic of keeping Demba Ba, if he is fit, and Carlos 
Tevez, if he is signed, quiet is hardly a secret.

It is a tough route to what is a decent group. Japanese champions Kashima 
Antlers (who actually finished third, 15 points behind Urawa Reds) are beatable 
and the same can be said of Thai title holders Muangthong United. The likely 
addition of the inexperienced, in continental terms, Jeju United is not a scary 
one either.

Adelaide may be safely in their group already but getting out will be tough. 
After winning theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> grand 
final earlier this year, excitement was high over a return to Asia given the 
2008 finalists’ special relationship with the continental competition.

However, if sitting rock bottom of the A-League with a third of the season 
gone was not painful enough, now being placed in what could be the toughest 
group of all eight adds another challenge to an already stressful season for 
the Reds.


United will not be the favourites to progress after being paired with the 
defending champions and one of the biggest spending and most ambitious clubs 
anywhere in the world.

Jeonbuk Motors have played more games, won more games and been in the knockout 
stage more than any other team in theAsian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league>. In November, the 
South Koreans added the 2016 title to their 2006 triumph and will be a force 
once again.


Not quite as successful in continental terms but a bigger draw these days is 
Jiangsu Suning. This is a club that spent more in last winter’s transfer window 
than any club of the big European leagues, except for England’s top tier. There 
was around $100m spent on Brazilian stars Ramires from Chelsea and Alex 
Teixeira from Shakhtar Donetsk; and then former Manchester City striker Jô and 
Socceroo Trent Sainsbury did not come cheap.

Such signings, especially the impressive Teixeira, took Jiangsu to second 
behind Guangzhou Evergrande, who won a sixth successive domestic title in 
October. Midway through the season, the team swapped coach Dan Petrescu for 
Choi Yong-soo of FC Seoul.

Seoul themselves will face Western Sydney but is not quite the same soulless 
side that Wanderers faced in 2014 and 2015. This year, the Koreans were the top 
scorers in the group stage thanks to the striking prowess of Adriano and Dejan 
Damjanović. Tony Popovic’s side will also expect Shanghai SIPG, with coach 
Andre Villas-Boas and striker Hulk, to come through the play-offs.

With either Urawa Reds or Kawasaki Frontale of Japan also on the horizon, the 
Wanderers will have to be at their very best on the long journey towards their 
destination.
 