
When I got the date for my sex reassignment surgery, I wasn't so worried about 
the operation itself (I'd be asleep, right?) as its aftermath: how I was going 
to look after myself during the two months it would take to recover? I called 
my parents and immediately my mother offered to take care of me at the family 
home. I'd never felt so glad or relieved: theGender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/gi/gender-identity-clinic/> suggest full-time care for 
at least the first two weeks, and getting it from my parents (especially my 
mother, a former district nurse) meant that they would be reassured that I was 
fine, while I would benefit from rest, relaxation and plenty of home cooking.

The day after my discharge from Charing Cross Hospital, my father drives me 
back to Horley, Surrey, where I will convalesce in my old bedroom. As he does 
so, the post-surgical pain increases dramatically. I try to be stoic: it isn't 
going away for some time, so I decide to get through the journey, sleep and see 
how I feel in the morning. Much worse, is the answer: the sight and smell of 
the neovagina instantly confirms that I've contracted an infection.

My father takes me to the nearest Urgent Treatment Centre. The nurse has never 
encountered my circumstances before, and warns that as the Accident & Emergency 
unit at East Surrey Hospital may not be able to treat me, I might need to 
return to Charing Cross. This would mean a long drive back to London in searing 
heat, two days before the Olympics. I hold back tears as we contact the GIC's 
nurse specialist, who says that this is not uncommon and can be handled with 
antibiotics. After inspection by a senior doctor, who says that the bruising 
above the wound has become infected, I am sent home with new medication.

The following Monday, the addition of new drugs to my painkiller regime 
completely floors me - and my energy was already low as my body strived to heal 
itself. I spend the entire afternoon in bed, having slept little at night due 
to the pain and the pills, which warp my dreams into vivid nightmares for weeks 
after the operation. My mother and I decide to stop the antibiotics slightly 
early; from there, my recovery is slow, but steady.

My movement is limited, as lying down hurts far less than sitting, but it does 
at least provide quiet time to read and watch films. My mother encourages me to 
go outside, but 10 days after surgery I can barely reach the top of our road. 
There are sharp pains as nerve endings reconnect; a dull, throbbing ache and an 
unbearable pushing sensation at the base of the affected area, which stay 
constant for weeks; and plenty of discharge for the first month. This is 
alleviated by regular baths, which are pleasant but boring.

To pass the time, I listen to the radio: one afternoon, the DJ plays Joy 
Division's Love Will Tear Us Apart <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHYOXyy1ToI>
, which was constantly on my stereo during my alienated youth. As I hear its 
opening bars, the entire transition, from my childhoodgender dysphoria 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Gender-dysphoria/Pages/Introduction.aspx> to this 
pain-filled moment in the house where I grew up, 20 years later, replays itself 
in my mind, and suddenly I'm in waves of cathartic tears.

"And yet there's still this appeal that we've kept through our lives …"

This feels like a watershed: gradually things improve. Being with my parents 
changes my relationship not just with them, but my home town. One day a friend 
visits and I take her on a tour: with just an afternoon and almost 
incapacitated, I still manage to show her the entire centre twice. My favourite 
feature is the sign in the bookshop: "Look! Fifty Shades of Grey in stock now." 
I dread to imagine the letters to thelocal paper 
<http://www.thisissurreytoday.co.uk/Horley-residents-angry-monstrous-fence/story-13504089-detail/story.html>
.

Three and a half weeks post-surgery, I take another friend to watch Horley 
Town play Holmesdale in the FA Cup. We stand behind the goal and when Horley's 
winger shanks a cross into touch, I'm nearest the ball. Instinctively I run to 
throw it back. I soon wish I hadn't, remembering that the pain will take weeks 
if not months to disappear completely.

Mentally, it's a strange time too. At first the discomfort and discharge stop 
me from forming a positive relationship with my altered body, and my constant 
urge to be active sits badly with my inability to walk more than a few hundred 
metres. Further constrained by the need to dilate three times daily, watching 
the world pass by on Twitter and television, I remind myself that this is 
temporary: soon, I can put it all behind me.

Coming back to London, I slowly step up my activity, meeting friends in local 
cafes and testing my pain barrier in going to watch Norwich City start the 
season at Fulham. Despite City'sabject hammering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/aug/18/fulham-norwich-city-premier-league>
, it feels wonderful to return to one of the mainstays of my social life.

Just as importantly, I start to familiarise myself with my changed body, 
getting used to the sight of it in the mirror. Then, after several weeks, the 
dilation stops being painful and becomes pleasurable, at least at times – the 
discovery of sexual sensation is another huge landmark, and finally I'm excited 
not just about returning to my pre-surgical normality but about discovering a 
post-surgical one.

Two months after surgery, I make a final, brief visit to the surgical team at 
the Clinic, who check my health and administer some silver nitrate to deal with 
thegranulation tissue <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Granulation_tissue> that 
has developed during the healing process. Before I leave, I schedule my last 
appointment with the psychiatric team, where we can address the final question: 
how do I feel?
 