
Last week, with much excitement, the new London Maggie's Centre for cancer 
care opened on a sliver of land between the Fulham Palace Road and Charing 
Cross Hospital in Hammersmith. Already there are five centres in Scotland, 
designed by Page and Park, Richard Murphy, Frank Gehry and Zaha Hadid, but the 
London centre, designed by Richard Rogers's practice, is the first of six 
planned for England and Wales. A total of 13 centres are planned to be open by 
2012.

They are the vision of Maggie Keswick Jencks who, while being treated for 
cancer, identified the need for patients to access emotional and psychological 
support and practical information in an uplifting environment, since, in her 
words, 'Above all, what matters is not to lose the joy of living in the fear of 
dying.' The buildings are closely linked to NHS oncology departments, but they 
don't have corridors or hospital paraphernalia. Visitors feel they are entering 
an 'open house' where the informality of conversation around a kitchen table 
helps to create an atmosphere of ease and sanctuary.

I was particularly excited to be offered the opportunity to create a series of 
gardens for the new centre, as I am a believer in the healing power of gardens 
and gardening. The calming effect of green and the fact that a beautiful, 
sensual environment can transport you can affect anyone. For those of us who 
choose to garden, there is nothing quite like the feeling of freedom that comes 
when you combine the cerebral with the physical. Building in the 'feel-good' is 
something that is now second nature in the way that I approach garden-making, 
but this was an opportunity to do it in the knowledge that all the energy was 
going to those who need it most.

The centre is based on the embrace of an arm that gradually envelops visitors 
as they move towards the kitchen at the heart of the building. A tall 
tomato-orange wall wraps around the building, providing protection

from the busy road and the hubbub of the hospital. My brief from Laura Lee and 
Marcia Blakenham, chief executive and vice chairman respectively of Maggie's, 
was that the building should be protected and cushioned by the green of a 
garden. The centre has been designed with three internal winter gardens and 
sun-filled roof terraces so that you are never more than a step away from the 
healing power of vegetation.

When I visited the site more than two years ago it was a delight to find that 
there was already a group of established London Planes there. They have 
textured trunks that lean at angles and immediately suggested a leafy woodland 
approach meandering between them. The entrance to the centre was key, as we 
knew that the biggest obstacle for many people scared by their situation was 
going to be getting over the threshold. The woodland walk has been planted with 
winter box (Sarcococca) for perfume and a soft undercurrent of leafy evergreen 
perennials, which will form a foil for a series of sensual ceramic sculptures 
by Hannah Bennett.

Hannah matched the glaze colours to the bark on the plane trees, and they lead 
your eye to the arrival courtyard, which is surrounded by a group of white 
Magnolia x loebneri 'Merrill'. There is a long bench here which connects the 
arrival courtyard through an opening in the front wall to the safety of the 
main inner courtyard. The last of the seven sculptures sits at the end of a 
leafy corridor by the front door, and is dished to hold a small pool of water 
to reflect the sky.

We surrounded the building with more than 100 Betula albosinensis var 
septentrionalis to filter noise and pollution. They are already showing the 
dark pink and mahogany patterning on the bark which, in time, will complement 
the warmth of the coloured walls. To play further with colour, a coppery layer 
of Luzula sylvatica 'Marginata' and orange-berried Iris foetidissima is massed 
beneath. The trees are concentrated in front of two frosted windows, which 
allow the shadow patterns to play on the glass and the visitor a shielded 
connection to the outside world.

Visitors are encouraged to find their own space inside the building, so there 
is a choice of courtyards to sit in. The north-facing courtyard is filled with 
the lush greenery of Tetrapanax, scented Nicotiana and the exotically perfumed 
climber Holboellia. The east courtyard has an outdoor fireplace, Sparrmannia 
and Iris japonica 'Ledger's Variety'. The focal point of the southern courtyard 
is a huge table under the shade of a feathery Albizia julibrissin, the Chinese 
Tree of Happiness, the bark and flowers of which are used as a calming sedative 
in Chinese medicine. There is perfume here, too, with Trachelospermum, honey 
spurge and scented pelargoniums. There will be grapes to eat from the vines 
that will cover the pergola, and at Cath Knox's suggestion we have planted some 
giant pots with peppermint and lemon verbena so that visitors will be able to 
pick their own herbs for a cup of tea and a chat.

Cath has been living with cancer for 12 years, and getting to know her has 
made the project very real for me. 'When you are told you have cancer, every 
moment counts,' she told me. 'To have those moments captured in the blossom of 
a magnolia that you may not see the following year, to stumble across perfume 
caught on the breeze or the scent of mint crushed between your fingers becomes 
incredibly meaningful.' I have always intuitively known that intimacy, 
sensuality and sanctuary in a garden are key to creating a sense of wellbeing, 
but it has been made so much more vivid seeing it through the eyes of someone 
who is seizing life with a new intensity. That intense connection with nature 
is something from which we can all benefit, and I feel privileged to have been 
able to create an environment which will offer that experience to those who may 
need it most.

· The London Maggie's Centre is open to the public as part of the Transport 
for London Open Garden Squares Weekend, 7-8 June (opensquares.org 
<http://www.opensquares.org>)

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>

Observer offer: Buy one Sarcococca Confusa in a 9cm pot for only £8.95 or 
three for only £22.85, saving £4. Call 0870 836 0909, quoting ref OBDP077, or 
send a cheque, payable to Observer Reader Offers with your order, to Observer 
Sarcococca Confusa Offer, OBDP077, Rookery Farm, Joys Bank, Holbeach St Johns, 
Spalding, PE12 8SG. Price includes UK mainland p&p. Dispatch within 28 days
 