
In the Ngiri-Ngiri district of Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, there is a wide trench which runs down the side of the 
street. Beside it, a team of men are working with shovels and rakes. Most are 
gathered around the edges, but others are standing in the liquid sewage and 
waste that fills the trench and laps around their cracked black boots.

The rainy season is beginning and the trench should be draining water from the 
muddy track which serves as a road, but it has become too clogged with the 
debris of tightly packed lives. Unless the team can clear the trench the slums 
on either side of the street will be flooded when the rain comes. One of the 
men, Karem, in his mid-twenties, is breaking up the solidifying mass of waste 
and mud with a rake, and his neighbour is shovelling it onto the side. Karem 
looks dolefully up and down the road. "My country, the DRC," he says, "it's 
fucked".

There are trenches like this beside streets like this all over Kinshasa, and 
all across the DRC. Just 8% of the urban population have access to decent 
sanitation, according to WSP estimates, which means that in Kinshasa alone 
there are over seven million people living without toilets. The UNDP's 2005 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper refers directly to the open trenches when it 
states that "more than 80 per cent of illnesses are linked to the bad state of 
the environment".

As the team pause for a break from the heat they buy water in tiny plastic 
bags from street vendors. It is relatively expensive, but also the only 
reliably clean source of drinking water. As they dextrously split the bags 
without spilling a drop, children in school uniforms pass by, seemingly 
accustomed to the great stench as the sun hits the sewage. They eat food from 
open stalls just metres from the trench, and for many getting home means making 
use of makeshift bridges or jumping across where the compacted waste on either 
side has narrowed the channel. But it is the young who are most at risk from 
the diseases the sewers harbour. 88% of diarrhoea infections, the second most 
common cause of infant mortality, are due to a lack of safe water and basic 
sanitation. For every 1,000 children born in the DRC, 126 will die before their 
first birthday.

Sanitation <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sanitation> also 
has a consequential impact on education, as a 2007 report by the ODI makes 
clear. Diarrhoeal diseases and parasites are often linked to a reduction in 
attendance and attention at school, either due to sickness of the child or a 
family member, with the burden of caring for relatives and going to collect 
clean water falling disproportionately on young females. Furthermore, girls 
will often deliberately avoid school if they cannot access female-only toilets.

The state, however, have neither the will nor the finances to provide this 
basic infrastructure. They justify the fact that sanitation attracts less than 
one percent of the already limited national budget by claiming that there is no 
public demand for it, but this is arguably due more to the cultural taboo that 
discussing toilet facilities still carries. The tangible desire for cleaner 
living conditions is evidenced by the fact that Karem and his workmates are all 
volunteers, working for free simply because the alternative is to watch their 
homes become swamped by their own waste. They are members of a NAPO (Noyau 
D'Action Pour Participation Populaire), a community group who work together to 
solve localised problems.

20-year-old Kaleb joined the NAPO because he was motivated by memories of 
flooding from previous years. "[During the flooding] there is no transportation 
and people can't even walk on foot. You have to carry people on your back to 
get around as it comes right up to our waists. After the floods, people go to 
bed hungry as they are unable to get food. People are in a hurry to buy food 
now while it is not raining as they will be unable to get it when it rains. We 
are living in a very difficult situation."

Kaleb does propose a solution. "We need to build a gutter and when it is 
built, the problem will be solved." The gutter he describes is effectively a 
concrete version of the trench that already exists, and is common in the 
relatively wealthier areas of Kinshasa. However, even these less rudimentary 
gutters soon become clogged without accompanying sewers and solid waste 
collection. The ODI report found that Kinshasa's public sanitation authority 
possesses just a single working rubbish lorry.

The NAPO in Ngiri-Ngiri has existed for three years, and each year its work is 
repeated. Without a state infrastructure to fall back on, their Sisyphean task 
is toiling simply to keep roads traversable and drains flowing, always knowing 
that the effects of the rainy season mean their labour is only a hard rain away 
from being undone. A permanent change will require a change in political 
priorities and with the DRC's first ever local elections scheduled for later 
this year, the significance of the local NAPO leaders should not be downplayed.

While in the short-term NGOs have been forced into a situation where they are 
in a literal sense bailing out the worst affected communities, in the longer 
term these local leaders have the chance to redirect the political discourse 
towards cleaner toilets and sewage systems. Cities are built on their sewers, 
and if the DRC is to break Karem's despairing assessment of its prospects, 
sanitation has to be seen not as an embarrassing problem, but as the foundation 
of good health and education. Jean-Michel Mvondo works for RECIC, a Civil 
Education network which supports NAPOs across the city. He says "Ngiri-Ngiri is 
one of the most unhealthy and dirty areas of Kinshasa and there is a serious 
problem with ditches of water, but we are convinced that good governance starts 
from the lowest level."

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 