
Tributes were paid today to a drum-maker who died after inhaling anthrax as he 
handled imported animal skins.

Fernando Gomez, 35, from Hackney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hackney>, 
east London, had been in the intensive care unit of Homerton University 
hospital since falling ill over a week ago. He died there yesterday with his 
wife and family around him.

His workshop in the borough has been sealed off and the Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Protection Agency (HPA) is due to 
examine it tomorrow.

Neighbour Nicolette Nixon said Gomez, a Spanish folk musician, had worked with 
children on the Morningside estate, where he lived.

"I knew him as Nando and he did six weeks with us," she said. "He was with the 
kids doing drumming workshops and African drumming.

"I didn't know him very well but he seemed a nice man and the kids really 
liked him."

The mayor of Hackney, Jules Pipe, said: "Sadly a Hackney resident has died in 
hospital following treatment for inhalation anthrax.

"Our sympathies are with his family and friends at this very sad time. The 
council is continuing to work very closely with the Health Protection Agency.

"We want to reassure our residents that inhalation anthrax is extremely rare 
and does not pass from person to person."

Eight other people who had been in the room where the skins were prepared were 
given antibiotics as a precautionary measure. None have developed symptoms.

People living in the building in Dalston Lane where Gomez had his studio have 
been told of his death.

The HPA will carry out testing there tomorrow as part of an investigation to 
identify the origin of the outbreak.

Dr Brian McCloskey, director of HPA London, said: "If this testing reveals the 
presence of anthrax spores then we will speak to local residents about this and 
specialist cleaning will be carried out to remove any trace of anthrax from the 
property.

"We have been following up any contacts of Mr Gomez who may have been exposed 
to the anthrax spores by being in the same room when the animal skins were 
being prepared and the drums were made.

Professor Nigel Lightfoot, the HPA chief adviser, said residents who lived 
near the flat or workshop were not at risk.

"It is important to stress that it is the making of animal skin drums that is 
the risk for coming into contact with anthrax rather than playing or handling 
drums," he said.

"We are, however, keen to reiterate to all individuals who make drums from 
imported animal skins that there is a risk of coming into contact with anthrax 
and that they should ensure they are aware of this and take precautions to 
protect themselves."

The last similar death in Britain was in 2006 when Christopher Norris, 50, a 
Scottish craftsman who made musical instruments including drums, died after 
inhaling anthrax.

Last year a report from NHS Borders said it was likely Norris contracted the 
illness after playing or handling anthrax-contaminated west African drums at a 
drumming workshop.

A fatal accident inquiry into his death is due to take place on November 18 at 
Edinburgh sheriffs court.
 