
A novel written by a web designer about a haunted ex-IRA man driven by ghosts 
to kill again is to be published thanks to an obscure American crime fiction 
internet site. The Twelve, by Armagh writer Stuart Neville, began life on the 
text screen of his mobile phone and has ended up with a ringing endorsement 
from noir-fiction novelistJames Ellroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesellroy>.

Ellroy, author of LA Confidential and American Tabloid, has described 
Neville's post-peace process thriller as "the best first novel I have read in 
years".

A short story based on Neville's main character - an IRA man on a revenge 
spree against, among others, his former comrades - was spotted onthuglit.com 
<http://www.thuglit.com> by respected New York literary agent Matt Sobel. Sobel 
signed up Neville on the strength of the short story, which the author had 
developed from his novel. The Twelve will be published here next month and in 
the United States this autumn, under the title The Ghosts of Belfast.

In Belfast this weekend Neville explained how the book was conceived and then 
later "nurse-maided" by one of America's top literary agencies, Sobel Weber 
Associates Inc.

"The book started life on my mobile phone," he said. "I literally got up out 
of bed with this idea in my head for a novel and the first thing I put my hand 
on was my PDA phone. I started writing it digitally there and then on the 
mobile screen because it was handy, and then later copied it onto my computer."

The 37-year-old from the Orangefield district of Armagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/armagh> City then posted a story based on the 
main character, Gerry Fegan, on the thuglit.com site.

"I submitted the story to the website in February last year and a week or two 
later Matt Sobel was in contact.

"Although I had written the novel two years ago, I had not submitted widely to 
publishers. There was no big list of rejection slips piling up at my home. 
Joining Matt's agency was the express ticket from the slush pile of rejection 
slips," he said. Neville stressed that he did not base any of Fegan's targets 
for revenge on real-life politicians or major players in the peace process. In 
the book the quite literally haunted Fegan goes after his former republican 
comrades, among others.

The six post-ceasefire killings are meant to be acts of bloody atonement for 
the 12 victims Fegan killed during the Troubles.

"One of those Fegan targets is after a seat in the Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> power-sharing executive but is 
being held back by his criminal past. I see this book primarily as a thriller 
with a paranormal element to it and one that explores the themes of Northern 
Ireland's recent past," he said.

"There are a lot of very sad people out there who have done terrible things in 
the past. Any kind of novel will have these kind of themes, coming out of this 
place, but there was nothing conscious in the telling of it."

Neville has taken time out from his day job thanks to the publishing deal and 
he is working on a sequel.

He said he was surprised that his first novel was to be printed on both sides 
of the Atlantic because usually NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is a "turn-off" subject in the 
media.

"A republican in Northern Ireland is an uncommon figure in crime fiction these 
days," he added.
 