The Otolith group, a film-making collective, are on the shortlist for this 
year’s Turner prize. But do you know what an Otolith is?  A kind of early Saxon 
sculpture  A Prussian prince  A small piece of bone in the inner ear  A game 
played by soldiers during the Napoleonic wars using amputated body parts Also 
shortlisted this year is painter Dexter Dalwood, who specialises in depicting 
imaginary scenes often involving celebrities. This is (supposedly) a painting 
of someone’s greenhouse. Whose?  Prince  Kurt Cobain  Michael Jackson  Alan 
Titchmarsh Whose Turner prize win in 1997 was overshadowed when a boozed-up 
Tracey Emin let rip on live TV?  Douglas Gordon  Rachel Whiteread  Keith Tyson  
Gillian Wearing Whose Turner show caused a literal stink in 2003 thanks to the 
decomposition of one of the art works?  Anya Gallaccio (rotting apples)  Chris 
Ofili (Elephant dung)  Damien Hirst (shark in formaldehyde)  Jake and Dinos 
Chapman (artwork showing three dismembered corpses) Whose Buster Keaton 
impression brought the house down in 1999?  Mike Nelson  Simon Starling  Steve 
McQueen  Johnny Depp Which Turner-nominated artist also calls himself King Cnut?
 Damien Hirst  Gary Hume  Anish Kapoor  Knut Åsdam Which of these artistic duos 
have won the Turner prize?  Jake and Dinos Chapman  Jane and Louise Wilson  
Gilbert and George  All of the above Who presented the 2001 Turner prize, 
saying: “At a time when political correctness is valued over honesty, I would 
also like to say: right on, motherfuckers!”  Joan Bakewell  Jonathan Jones  
Yoko Ono  Madonna Who said of the 2005 Turner prize: “Ignoring it is the 
kindest thing one can do”?  Tate director Nicholas Serota  Twitter treasure 
Stephen Fry  Evening Standard art critic Brian Sewell  Artist David Hockney 
Each year the public is invited to suggest to the jury artists they think 
should be considered. Who received public nomination in 1994 with a stunning 
1504 votes?  Ron Mueck  Wallace and Gromit  Jack Vettriano  Rolf Harris Which 
Turner-winning artist’s partner destroyed everything he owned in order to 
create a new work in 2001?  Mat Collishaw (partner of Tracey Emin)  Marcus 
Coates (partner of Rachel Whiteread)  Michael Landy (partner of Gillian Wearing)
 All of the above Where was the 2007 Turner prize exhibition held?  Margate  
London  Liverpool  St Ives Which prize winner also fronts the band Owada, famed 
for their atonal delivery?  Martin Creed  Jeremy Deller  Wolfgang Tillmans  
Howard Hodgkin Which MP described the 2002 Turner as “cold, mechanical, 
conceptual bullshit”?  Boris Johnson, then MP for Henley  Kim Howells, then 
culture secretary  Peter Mandelson, former secretary of state  Jeremy Hunt, 
current culture secretary Who said in their acceptance speech: “It’s amazing 
what you can do with an E in A-level art, a twisted imagination and a chainsaw”?
 Howard Hodgkin  Damien Hirst  Keith Tyson  Grayson Perry  You got…  You're 
hotter than a Turner sunset. Get yourself an agent – the 2011 shortlist awaits  
You're hotter than a Turner sunset. Get yourself an agent – the 2011 shortlist 
awaits  You're hotter than a Turner sunset. Get yourself an agent – the 2011 
shortlist awaits  You're sharper than a Dexter Dalwood interior. Only a tiny 
bit of brushing up required  You're sharper than a Dexter Dalwood interior. 
Only a tiny bit of brushing up required  You're sharper than a Dexter Dalwood 
interior. Only a tiny bit of brushing up required  You clearly know your arts 
from your elbow but, like Damien Hirst's pickled shark, you're going nowhere 
fast. Time to get a wriggle on  You clearly know your arts from your elbow but, 
like Damien Hirst's pickled shark, you're going nowhere fast. Time to get a 
wriggle on  You clearly know your arts from your elbow but, like Damien Hirst's 
pickled shark, you're going nowhere fast. Time to get a wriggle on  You clearly 
know your arts from your elbow but, like Damien Hirst's pickled shark, you're 
going nowhere fast. Time to get a wriggle on  You clearly know your arts from 
your elbow but, like Damien Hirst's pickled shark, you're going nowhere fast. 
Time to get a wriggle on  You're messier than Tracey Emin's unmade bed. Go back 
to wax crayons  You're messier than Tracey Emin's unmade bed. Go back to wax 
crayons  You're messier than Tracey Emin's unmade bed. Go back to wax crayons  
You're messier than Tracey Emin's unmade bed. Go back to wax crayons  You're 
messier than Tracey Emin's unmade bed. Go back to wax crayons  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  