
The death of Dr David Kelly imagined in paint, a haunting Scottish lament 
heard beneath the bridges of the Clyde and a history of the present told as if 
by a voyager on the Soviet space station in 2103 – all these are works by the 
artists on a lyrical, melancholic, even elegiac shortlist for the 2010Turner 
prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize>.

And, despite the great popularity of the Banksy exhibition in Bristol last 
year, his fans will be disappointed. Although enthusiasm for his work was 
expressed publicly by one of the judges, Andrew Nairne, the street artist has 
not made the shortlist.

Dexter Dalwood <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dexter-dalwood> is 
the artist whose work titled The Death of David Kelly might draw comparisons 
with hefty history paintings such as David's magisterial The Death of Marat, 
which depicted the revolutionary journalist's corpse in his bath after he was 
killed by Charlotte Corday.

Dalwood's painting, however, is quite different. It shows a tree backlit by 
the moon atop a little mound: an imagined vision of the scene of the weapons 
expert's death rather than a depiction (perhaps mercifully) of his suicide in 
2003.

Dalwood, 49, has also made works called Greenham Common and Brighton Bomb, 
constructing scenes from descriptions in the media and exercising his theory 
that "history is a construction, a fiction ... I am constructing histories from 
a necessarily subjective view, which is no more or less real than any of the 
other attempts to describe that time or event".

The titles of his works, said the novelist Philip Hensher, one of the jurors 
for the £25,000 prize, are "tantalising", referring to paintings such as The 
Queen's Bedroom and Sharon Tate's House. Recent years have seen "an overt 
political commitment" surfacing amid the artist's interest in celebrity, 
according to Hensher.

This year's shortlist is unusual because it includes two painters. Angela de 
la Cruz <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/angela-de-la-cruz>, 45, a 
Spanish-born artist who distorts, rips, breaks and crushes her canvases to the 
point where they resemble sculptures as much as paintings. "She has a great 
love of material textures, of rich messy surfaces and complicated forms. They 
carry great emotional weight and they are a sheer pleasure to look at," said 
Hensher.

If what draws together all four shortlisted artists for the prize is 
melancholia and wistfulness for the past, then those qualities are particularly 
present in the work ofSusan Philipsz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/susan-philipsz>, the Scottish 
sculptor who was once rejected by Glasgow School of Art (but accepted at 
Dundee).

Philipsz, 44, has been nominated for, among other works, a sound installation 
recently created for the Glasgow International Festival of VisualArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>. Beneath three of the Clyde 
bridges, passers-by could catch recordings of Philipsz singing a 16th-century 
Scottish lament called Lowlands Away.

Catching people unawares under the bridges, the sound had a haunting, 
mysterious lilt: Philipsz's work draws on "loss, longing and the power of 
memory", according to judge Polly Staple, the director of the Chisenhale 
gallery in London.

Philipsz is particularly adept at finding curious and evocative sites for her 
sound pieces, which invariably consist of recordings of her own pleasant, but 
untrained, singing voice. For an exhibition in Spain last year, a recording of 
her singing Syd Barrett's song Long Gone was heard by visitors entering the 
museum. She has also made pieces for supermarkets, bus stations and 
underpasses; her singing "acting as an emotional trigger for artists to reflect 
on their own sense of being".

Penelope Curtis, the director of Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain>, said today that 
organisers would be "flexible" if Philipsz wanted to make a piece for the 
Turner prize exhibition using a space other than the rooms reserved for the 
show.

The final name on the shortlist is that of the Otolith Group, which consists 
of Kodwo Eshun, 44, and Anjalika Sagar, 42. Neither is a trained artist – Eshun 
studied English at Oxford University and Sagar read anthropology and Hindi at 
the University of London.

Working primarily in film, the group – whose name comes from the term for the 
part of the inner ear that senses tilt – has delved into forgotten archives to 
uncover hidden histories, or stories of what might have been. Their film 
Otolith 1 imagines a world with humans, ill-adapted to gravity on Earth, who 
exist on space stations; it is narrated by Dr Usha Adebaran-Sagar in 2103, who 
reports on the present from her perspective far in the future.

The Turner prize exhibition at Tate Britain opens on 4 October 2010. The 
winner will be announced on 6 December 2010.
 