
Aside from the fact that students will be paying more, it's amazing what 
impact the new fees system will have on almost every aspect of higher 
education. The inevitable rise of a consumer culture is changing the 
expectations of students about what their chosen university will and should be 
like. But no matter how much universities spend on new prospectuses, open days 
or the transport of recruitment officers to schools up and down the country, I 
believe there is, and will never be, any better marketing tool available for an 
institution than a graduate.

I am a proud alumnus from the university of Leicester <http://www2.le.ac.uk/> 
and a member of its Alumni Association, which aims to raise money for the 
university and boost its profile on the world stage by encouraging graduates to 
foster a sense of pride in the institution through "homecoming days", 
networking events and swanky dinners.

Having just joined, I am the youngest member of a committee that is stratified 
by leavers from every decade back to the 1960s. Like most alumni committees 
there's been a focus on rekindling old flames with graduates in their 40s, 50s 
and beyond and so our activities have been tailored to their needs. Little 
wonder why – it's the baby boomers and X-geners who have cash to spare and 
connections to lean on which are universally lapped up by institutions.

But what it means to be an alumnus is changing, and the new demands placed on 
universities are driving this change. Students paying more will be expecting 
more, and quite rightly. In such a competitive marketplace universities will 
have to come up with new ways to satisfy increasing demands, such as higher 
bursaries, scholarships and the promise of new investment in facilities. For 
the rich institutions, this will be easy, for some it will be less so. But 
whatever the financial position, it is the pool of alumni that can add the 
greatest marginal value to a student's experience.

A graduate, for example, would be fantastic mentor, offer interview advice and 
even steers on the best ways to write the perfect graduate scheme online 
application – there isn't any better short-term career advice you can get than 
from someone who is in the job you're looking for. You don't need bags of cash 
to help with these three things – just a willingness to help people who are 
faced with the toughest ever graduate job market.

At the last meeting our committee took the decision to start thinking about 
this, and how recent graduates could be active rather than passive because 
waiting 20 years to re-engage with former students wastes 20 years of potential 
fruitful engagement. I'm not the only one who graduated in 2009 who's proud of 
their experience at Leicester, and – like these others - would gladly proffer 
my time to help the university or boost a student's employability skills in 
some way.

A social media campaign - via channels such as the alumni association's 
Facebook page <http://www.facebook.com/leicesteralumni> - centred on graduation 
is the first of our new ventures, inviting soon-to-be leavers to suggest future 
alumni events and activities for the association. This should inspire a closer 
relationship with even more leavers taking some ownership over what we as a 
committee do in the future. We'll keep on discussing and debating this issue in 
the committee until eventually Leicester has a robust mechanism for engaging 
all its alumni, rather than just the ones who can afford it.

Getting this right could reap rewards for the university, its students and its 
alumni. Asking of its recent graduates for something other than money could 
unlock a new world of engagement; a new proposition for students to become more 
employable; and something for a new alumnus to be proud of. The higher 
expectations of students should be embraced and act as a catalyst for taking 
risks and pursuing new exciting activities. An alumnus could be the most 
valuable asset an institution could invest in.

Alex Smith is development manager at Recourse <http://recourse.org.uk/>, a 
support network for post-16 education professionals

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>
 