
Parents are not able to make informed decisions about what to allow their 
children to watch because of flaws in the current TV content ratings system, 
according to a study conducted by an advocacy group.


The Parents TV Council, a non-partisan education organization whose mission 
<http://w2.parentstv.org/Main/> is to “protect children and families from 
graphic sex, violence and profanity in the media, because of their proven 
long-term harmful effects”, has conducted astudy 
<http://w2.parentstv.org/Main/News/Detail.aspx?docID=3317> on the commercial 
broadcast networks ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox to mark the 20th anniversary of the 
system. The results deem the system inadequate for protecting children from 
graphic sex, violence and profanity on television.

“Parents who rely on the TV content ratings system to make informed decisions 
about what to watch on television have been deceived, as our new research shows 
that the ratings system has systemically failed to provide accurate and 
consistent information for its entire 20-year existence,” said the PTC 
president, Tim Winter, in a statement.

Chief among the findings: currently, no G-rated (appropriate for all 
audiences) regularly scheduled series air during prime time; there are few 
programs on prime time broadcast television rated TV-PG; and few differences 
between the content of programs rated TV-PG and those rated TV-14.

“The implications in our report are enormous and should give the TV industry 
significant pause,” Winter said. “The industry should have to answer as to why 
TV-G-rated primetime series are extinct; why the lines between TV-PG and TV-14 
shows are blurred; why more adult content is being shown on TV-PG shows; why 
nudity and violence are increasing on broadcast TV overall.”

The system dates back two decades, when it was created and implemented under 
the Telecommunications Act of 1996 to block inappropriate programs from the 
eyes of children. This latest study marks PTC’s seventh stab at exposing why it 
believes the system to be a failure – and the previous six were similarly harsh.


In its study, PTC argues that the TV ratings review board should be completely 
independent of the entertainment industry. Currently, it is administered by the 
TV networks themselves.

“TV networks rate their own shows, creating an inherent conflict of interest,” 
Winter states. “You don’t see any TV-MA rated (the highest adult TV rating) 
shows on broadcast TV. It’s not that some of the shows don’t warrant the MA 
rating, it’s that the networks are financially motivated not to rate programs 
properly because most corporate sponsors won’t advertise on MA-rated programs.”

PTC calls for an overhaul, saying: “Congress, the FCC, public health 
advocates, and parents must insist that the TV content ratings system be 
accountable to the public and meet the needs of the parents and families it was 
intended to serve.”

Recently, PTC criticized 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/parents-television-council-blasts-abcs-873531>
 ABC’s Biblical drama Of Kings and Prophets for not being family-friendly due 
to its “graphic content”.


“The real question here is, why wouldn’t ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> and the show’s producers want to reach 
the largest audience possible by making a series based on the Bible able to be 
viewed by families?” said Winter in March.

“This further demonstrates a disconnect between what the entertainment 
industry wants to produce and what family audiences want to consume.”
 