
Killer Tigers
9pm, Animal Planet


It's Man v Tiger as the number of fatal attacks by big cats is on the rise in 
rural India. In the Sundarbans region, overpopulation is pushing people closer 
to the boundaries of the parks where the tigers live. The tigers, for their 
part, are also losing prey and being forced to the park edge where they attack 
cows, goats – and humans. Large predator expert Dave Salmoni investigates the 
crisis and finds that it's worsening, as the tigers are actually teaching their 
cubs how to hunt humans; they stalk their victims from behind and deliver a 
lethal blow to the neck.Martin Skegg

Timeshift: Hotel Deluxe
9pm, BBC4


William Morris spoke of catering "to the swinish luxury of the rich", 
something that the five-star hotel has been doing since the words Savoy and 
Ritz entered the lexicon as bywords for opulence. Hotel Deluxe explores the 
rise of these grand palaces of relaxation and servility where real life, and 
occasionally morality, are suspended. Innovative in design and technology, the 
new ways of the likes of Conrad Hilton threatened the status quo of the old 
guard, while London's pioneering Blakes catered for the rock star set.

Ben Arnold

Finding Amelia
9pm, Discovery

In July 1937, while attempting to fly around the world, Amelia Earhart 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2009/09/14/090914crat_atlarge_thurman>
 went missing in the Pacific. For years it was assumed she ran out of fuel and 
crashed in the ocean. But what if she succeeded in landing on the tiny, 
uninhabited island of Nikumaroro? That's the thesis of historic aircraft 
recovery expert and Dick Van Dyke lookalike Richard E Gillespie, who has 
several times explored the island seeking conclusive evidence that Earhart died 
a castaway. An overlong documentary that follows Gillespie's quest and tells 
the story of Earhart's final journey.Jonathan Wright

The Apprentice
9pm, BBC1

This week, the teams have to make and market a new biscuit, which leads to 
many serious conversations rendered unintentionally hilarious by what they are 
being forced to discuss: "I've obviously got some experience with biscuits," 
says one potential team leader, gravely. They head to a biscuit development 
laboratory to develop their creations, but first they have to realise that they 
appear to be talking complete nonsense.

Rebecca Nicholson

Afghanistan: The Battle For Helmand
9pm, BBC2


For most of the near decade that British troops have been fighting in 
Afghanistan, the focus of their war has been Helmand, a region famous even 
among Afghans for the hostility of its terrain and the doggedness of its 
people. Mark Urban presents this tough but meticulously fair survey of 
Britain's efforts, correctly acknowledging the bravery and resourcefulness of 
the soldiers while suggesting that, for far from the first time in the history 
of warfare, those on the frontline have been let down by the indecisiveness of 
their political leaders, and the indifference of their home public.Andrew 
Mueller

24 Hours In A&E
9pm, Channel 4


Claire walks into A&E alone at King's College Hospital, London, having been 
knocked off her bike. She'll be OK, unlike her boyfriend – killed in a cycling 
accident a year before. Lesser fly-on-the-wall programmes would have ladled the 
pathos on with a shovel but there's an unfussy, understated humanity here. No 
trite little back dramas, no faffing around with wobbly ladders or faulty 
electrics – just immediate situations and reactions. And although narratives 
are inevitable in all such documentaries, here they're never overly contrived.
Ali Catterall
 