
One aspect of small-screen drama goes beyond artistic criticism and into 
metaphysics: to what extent should fictional characters watch TV? Once, when 
EastEnders was screened straight after the Queen's Christmas broadcast, the 
Albert Square edition began with the characters switching off Her Majesty and 
having a cup of tea. A clever idea, but ruinous to the viewers' suspension of 
disbelief: what followed the monarch on the Fowlers' set, as it clearly 
couldn't beEastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders>?

Brookside addressed this problem by giving its families a fictional TV soap 
opera to discuss, but this solution retreated from realism in a different way: 
if the clothes, jobs and illnesses of the Corkhills and the rest were supposed 
to invite recognition, why did they have invented entertainment?

The Royle Family understood that it is funnier and more naturalistic if 
made-up people are seeing the shows that Harry Hill, Charlie Brooker and 
Mitchell and Webb are sending up, and two current dramas are extending this 
with smart TV in-jokes. Two of this season's run ofOutnumbered (BBC1) have 
begun with the precocious Karen re-enacting Britain's Got Talent and then The 
Apprentice, with toy animals and dolls standing in for Simon Cowell, Lord Sugar 
and the contestants. ForAshes to Ashes (BBC1), as a period drama, broadcasting 
samples are useful in recreating the 1980s, but, at their best, these 
references are subversively incorporated in the story: as, last week, when DCI 
Gene Hunt was revealed as the perpetrator of the notorious vandalism of the 
Blue Peter garden.

Some find such self-references by the medium self-indulgent and their 
prevalance can be seen as a result of a loss of confidence by the medium. 
Though when jokes or allusions to art, literature or politics are seen as 
potentially elitist or alienating, it seems reasonable that people watching 
telly will be knowledgeable about TV. But broadcasting, more than any other 
art-form, creates a national conversation and it would be strange for the 
medium itself to be excluded.
 