
Two people have been killed and 23 injured after a suspected drunken driver 
fleeing police crashed through barricades set up for the South by Southwest 
festival in Texas.

Art Acevedo, Austin's police chief, said five of the injured were in critical 
condition. The crash happened around 12.30 am local time as the driver tried to 
evade a pursuing police officer. Acevedo said the two people who died were on a 
moped that the motorist hit. The car also hit pedestrians in front of a club 
that was emptying.

The police chief told reporters during a news conference that the motorist 
also struck a cab before crashing, jumping out of his car and trying to run. A 
pursuing officer shocked him with a stun gun and took him into custody.

The man, whose name has not been released, faces two counts of capital murder 
and 23 counts of aggravated assault with a vehicle, Avevedo said.

The accident stunned those at the annual SXSW music, film and interactive 
conference that draws tens of thousands toAustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> each year. Many were getting 
real-time reports of the accident from social media.

The street was full of concert-goers just minutes earlier, but officials had 
cleared the street because it was a fire lane. Acevedo did not identify the 
driver or the victims and asked witnesses and those who might have taken video 
to contact police rather than post it to the internet. He said all the injured 
were taken to local hospitals.

Police said the man pulled into a nearby petrol station after an officer tried 
to stop him, wove through cars and then took off at a high speed the wrong way 
down a one-way street. He took a right turn on Red River Street, crashing 
through a barricade and narrowly missing a police officer who was standing 
guard, they said.

He hit some of the victims in front of the Mohawk, a local club hosting Spin 
events during the five-day music conference, police said. He continued down the 
street where he struck and killed the two victims on the moped and then hit the 
cab before finally crashing, they said.

Officers had closed off a two-block section of downtown Austin and continued 
to investigate into the early morning. Acevedo said there were no plans to 
change safety protocols at the festival.
 