
As the peak month for enrolments, September is always a busy time for 
colleges. But after a government U-turn on funding for English classes for 
immigrants (known as Esol), this year is proving chaotic.

Funding regulations announced in last November's skills strategy set out 
government plans to focus fully funded Esol courses on those actively seeking 
work, such as those claiming jobseekers allowance and employment support 
allowance. Learners claiming income support, working tax credits and housing 
benefit – who had previously been eligible for fully funded English courses – 
would have to pay at least half the cost of their lessons or have them funded 
by their employer. Many in the sector feared it could make education and 
training – and ultimately employment – inaccessible to those who needed it 
most, particularly mothers with young children, who represent a good proportion 
of those on inactive benefits.

But last month, just weeks away from the start of the new academic year, it 
emerged that the government had changed its mind. There was no big 
announcement; the news slipped out quietly via funding guidance documents 
published on the Skills Funding Agency's website.

And while the U-turn has been largely welcomed by the sector, since the news 
hit home at the end of August, staff in colleges up and down the country have 
been working flat out to manage the fallout.

Like many other institutions, London's City and Islington College had 
attempted to get round the proposed funding changes by devising replacement 
courses to attract funding from elsewhere.

The college, which generally has about 2,000 part-time Esol learners, created 
up to 60 new "functional skills" courses that combine vocational learning with 
basic literacy skills, for those who ordinarily would have done Esol courses.

Since last month's surprise announcement, the college has been trying to turn 
some of these new programmes back into Esol courses, but this has increased the 
administrative workload at an already busy time of year.

As Grant Glendinning, the college's director of lifelong learning, explains: 
"We've had to scrap all our original enrolment forms and invest in emergency 
training for our registry staff. We've also had to produce new forms for 
learners to declare they are actively seeking work – they need that to get the 
funding. It's been very time-intensive and a bit wasteful really."

But despite the hassle, he is keen to stress how pleased he is about the 
U-turn. What worries him most is that there may be students out there who have 
no idea that they are eligible for fully funded courses. "From June and July we 
were telling people they were not going to be eligible. How do we get the 
message to them that they are now eligible for Esol and get them to come back 
to us?" he asks.

Having found themselves in a similar predicament, staff at Bournemouth and 
Poole College have been pounding the streets to spread the word. Knowing that 
the new funding guidance would leave many students unable to pay for courses, 
Sue Sharkey, director of skills for life at the college, had reduced numbers 
for Esol classes by 75% and let go agency teaching staff (who used to make up 
50% of the workforce) at the end of last term. Since the big U-turn she has 
been desperately trying to recruit new staff.

Over the last few weeks, teachers have been leafleting local shops, 
restaurants, cafes and children's centres. "At this stage in the term, we'd 
usually be planning lessons and drawing up class lists. Instead, we've been 
assessing and enrolling students from 10am to 7.30 every evening. There is a 
real need in the area, so we are willing to do this to expand our student 
numbers. But if only we'd known about it earlier ..."

Things are also chaotic at City College Brighton and Hove, which has replaced 
almost half of its Esol classes with newly created "functional skills". "We'd 
love to switch some of the new courses back to Esol, but doing that at this 
late stage in the day would be like turning round a juggernaut," says Simon 
Chandler, team leader for Esol at the college.

Chris Taylor, programme director at the National Institute of Adult Continuing 
Education, is not surprised to hear colleges are feeling the pressure. "What we 
have now is a fairly confused picture, with many providers at different stages 
in terms of understanding the latest advice and guidance," she says.

Glendinning says the timing of the U-turn is potentially damaging to colleges' 
credibility. "A lot of our students hear about courses via word of mouth so it 
could look like we've been telling them porky pies. And our planning – which 
was actually very good – looks a bit undermined."

A spokesman for the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said: 
"The government has repeatedly taken action to lessen bureaucratic restrictions 
on colleges. The introduction of some additional flexibility for colleges to 
provide subsidised training for people on a wider range of benefits is a 
continuation of this process.

"English language training can be a vital step towards finding employment, and 
the government is committed to effective local provision."

But given the fact that an extensive campaign against the changes had been 
running since the start of the year, led by Esol teachers, what college staff 
really want to know is why it took the government so long to arrive at a 
decision.
 