
Wyclif looked destined to become an Aids orphan. His mother Deborah was sick 
during her pregnancy and had to give up her job at a local school. She and her 
husband feared they would not live to bring up the new baby, who would then be 
dependent on the kindness and limited financial means of relatives, if he was 
lucky. Many Aids orphans, as those who have lost one or both parents are known, 
live a brutal life on the streets.

"I know my health status," Deborah told the Guardian five years ago. "The time 
will come when Robert and I are not there for Wyclif or the other children. 
They will become orphans."

Yet today, Wyclif Kukiriza is a bright-eyed, inquisitive little five-year-old, 
with a determined streak. Nobody else is going to show off his house but him.

He grips my hand firmly and tows me through mud and rubble tracks in the 
impoverished Baise suburb of Kampala to the dark, two-room, concrete bungalow 
with crumbling plastered walls that he shares with his parents and two elder 
siblings.

His vitality is great to see. Wyclif escaped infection because his mother 
received good medical care at Mulago hospital in Kampala and was given drugs 
and a caesarean section to reduce the chances of transmission. And five years 
on, Deborah and Robert no longer expect an early death.

Against all the odds, sub-Saharan Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> now has anti-retroviral drugs which 
keep people with HIV alive. A global campaign brought down the prices from 
$10,000 (£6,400) a year per person to less than $100 (£64). Aids treatment is 
free, thanks to western donor governments.

Wyclif's good fortune is that Deborah and Robert live in Uganda's capital city 
where HIV care is easily accessible and many local groups like Tusitukire Wamu 
(United We Stand), originally set up by eight women against domestic violence, 
offer HIV counselling and support.

That was where Deborah turned first for help. Both she and Robert are taking 
antiretroviral drugs every day and staying well. She no longer thinks HIV will 
kill her. "I am no longer worried," she said.

What she probably does not know is that no expert working in HIV today would 
dare assume the drug supply is secure. Four million people worldwide, nearly 
three-quarters of them in sub-Saharan Africa, are now on ARVs and must take 
them every day for the rest of their life unless a cure is found, which looks 
highly unlikely any time soon. Over 5 million still need treatment.

The donor community, faced with recession at home, is cutting back and trying 
not to take on new commitments.

Ugandan doctors have been among the first to sound the alarm. Mulago hospital 
itself was having to turn away patients who were newly diagnosed for want of 
Aids drugs, the renowned Aids specialist Dr Peter Mugyenyi, who runs a research 
centre there, told the US Congress earlier this year.

He warned that they may run too short to be able to keep supplying those who 
have already started taking them.

So the Kukirizas' future may be less certain than they know. It may be just as 
well they don't, because they have enough other problems.

For the last few weeks, Robert has been out of work. He was a minibus driver, 
but the battered vehicle he drove finally collapsed and the owner has scrapped 
it. The hours were long and it wasn't an incredibly lucrative job – if he 
didn't get enough passengers and the takings were low, he had to pay the owner 
out of his own pocket – but it was steady.

Now he spends his days looking for another minibus to drive, while the 
couple's friends subsidise them. But they have moved from the house where 
Wyclif first lived, where they couldn't pay the rent a few times and the owner 
confiscated some of their possessions,and now live rent-free, looking after the 
house of a friend who works away from home as a truck driver. All three 
children are in school – the boy of 13 who wants to be a footballer and the 
girl of 11 who would like to be a businesswoman, as well as their baby brother– 
though they stop attending when money is tight. Even in government schools, 
there are uniforms, books and exams to pay for. Wyclif is in kindergarten, 
where he already has a report of the "could do better" variety. That may be 
something to do with the fact that he didn't speak until he was four.

But Wyclif's intelligence is unmistakable. Prompted by adults to talk about 
himself, he says nothing, looking at the mobile phone battery in his hand as 
they offer suggestions. Then, as the attention switches away from him, he says: 
"I want to drive an aeroplane." His mother laughs in astonishment. He says he 
saw one in the sky. It would be nice to think that, against the odds, he could 
reach for the sky one day.

Factfile: Uganda

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 135

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 75.6%

Debt per capita: $37.05 (£23.71)

Life expectancy: 52

% children in education (F/M): 55.2/57.1
 