
The graduate jobs market has shrunk for the first time in four years as 
employers scale back recruitment drives amid concerns about the economy 
following the vote to leave the EU.

An annual survey of graduate recruiters showed an 8% drop in vacancies on a 
year ago as companies also cited concerns about a new apprenticeship levy to be 
paid by all big employers from next April. The fall in 2016 is a marked 
contrast with last year when the number of graduate jobs rose by 13% 
year-on-year.

The Association of Graduate Recruiters <http://www.agr.org.uk/Home> (AGR) said 
that university leavers should not despair at the latest drop in new jobs, 
however. “The majority of graduate employers are still hiring in significant 
numbers,” said AGR’s chief executive, Stephen Isherwood.

He cautioned against overplaying the drop in vacancies. “What we found in the 
financial crisis was that employers were struggling to get the message out that 
they were still recruiting and that it wasn’t armageddon out there.”

Hays reports sharp drop in hiring after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/hays-drop-hiring-brexit-vote-eu-referendum-banks-recruitment>
The AGR survey found there were 19,732 positions to fill for 2016 compared 
with 21,427 last year. Vacancies in construction, retail and engineering had 
fallen the most. IT and telecoms was the only sector in which vacancies were up 
on last year.


The drop follows four years of sustained growth in the graduate recruitment 
market and contrasts with employer forecasts at the start of this year for 
growth of 2% in vacancies this year.


For some employers the decline in graduate vacancies had been mitigated by an 
increase in apprenticeships, although not enough to make up for the shortfall, 
according to AGR. Among graduate employers, the number of apprenticeships has 
risen by 13% this year.

Overall the number of vacancies for graduate jobs and apprenticeships 
decreased 3% year-on-year.


Asked what their three biggest worries were for the next recruitment season, 
employers ranked Brexit as top, followed by competition for getting people with 
the right skills and then the impact of theapprenticeship levy, which is being 
introduced next April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
.


More than one in 10 employers said they were repackaging some graduate roles 
as higher-level apprenticeships because of the levy.

Isherwood said that with employers worried about skills shortages they would 
be wary of significantly reducing graduate recruitment. “Employers have learned 
that when they cut off graduate recruitment for the needs of short-term budget 
reduction, they pay the price three years down the line,” he said.

The report is based on responses from 208 companies offering school leaver and 
graduates jobs. The year-on-year figures on graduate jobs are based on 154 
employers.
 