
A laboratory in the UK is among a growing list of those accidentally sent 
samples of live anthrax by the US department of defence in 2007, officials have 
confirmed.

The UK lab that received the anthrax is run by a private company, which 
destroyed the deadly pathogens soon after they arrived from the US without ever 
realising they were live rather than inactivated. It is understood that none of 
the workers who had contact with the anthrax fell ill.

We do not believe there is any continuing health risk to staff or the public
HSE 
The Health and Safety Executive refused to name the laboratory where the 
incident took place, on the grounds that it would pose a security risk if the 
anthrax research carried out at the facility became public. At the time the 
pathogen was sent to the lab, private companies ran at least 98 labs in the UK 
with sufficient containment to handle bugs as dangerous as anthrax.

The company that runs the lab only learned that the anthrax sample was 
potentially live when the US Department of Defense got in touch about the 
shipment during theircurrent investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/27/pentagon-live-anthrax-accident>
, the Guardian understands. The HSE said that together with other government 
agencies, it was “ready to support the company as necessary”.

“We do not believe there is any continuing health risk to staff or to the 
public. If anyone would have been exposed in 2007, symptoms would have 
presented shortly after. No such reports of ill health were apparent in the 
workforce,” the HSE said.

The DoD breaches, which occurred at Dugway Proving Ground – a US military 
laboratory in Utah – appear to have occurred over several years. The DoD have 
said their investigation is ongoing, but so far live samples of the pathogen 
have been found to have been sent to a total of 68 laboratories across the US, 
Australia, South Korea and now the UK.

Dugway is a facility which produces anthrax – a weaponised version of a 
naturally occurring deadly bacteria – in industrial quantities. From there, 
samples of the pathogen are sent to labs across the world for use in testing 
for detection equipment and treatments.

In theory the samples are “inactivated” by radiation first, but experts told 
the Guardian that the system may not have been properly calibrated, potentially 
over an extended period of time.

In a statement, DoD spokesperson Maj Eric Badger said that there were “no 
suspected or confirmed cases of infection, and no known risk to the general 
public”.

“Concurrently, DoD is performing a comprehensive review of its laboratory 
procedures, processes, and protocols associated with inactivating spore-forming 
anthrax, by order of deputy secretary of defense Bob Work,” Badger added.

A similar breach was revealed in 2014 at the Center for Disease Control in 
Atlanta, Georgia, when up to 70 staff were thought to have been accidentally 
exposed to the live toxin because the lab failed to use an approved 
sterilisation technique. It is not known whether the breaches at Dugway – which 
appear to be much larger in scope, and happened over a much longer period of 
time – may have had a similar origin.

“Obviously there’s going to be a lot of discussion and investigation into what 
went wrong here,” said Stephen Morse, a professor of infectious disease 
epidemiology at Columbia university in New York, who is an expert in 
bio-defence. “To me the surprising thing is that it didn’t just happen for a 
short period of time, it was a problem that went on for a while.”

Richard Ebright, an expert in bio-weapons at Rutgers university, said there 
was little or no direct danger to the public. Instead, he said, “the major 
concern is the security breach” of not knowing where the weaponised spores – 
from even a small amount of which a dangerous amount can be grown – have gone.

 