
Every year millions of travellers facing early departures stay the night 
before in a hotel near the airport or station. However, if something goes wrong 
in the UK, don't expect the insurance provided by Lloyds bank to come to your 
aid, according to one couple.

For a decade Prue and Brian Briggs, who live in Plymouth, have paid for a 
Lloyds TSB Gold current account which offers worldwide travel insurance. They 
pay £155 a year for its travel insurance, and other benefits.

But when they recently claimed on the policy after a suitcase was stolen as 
they travelled to London for an onward trip to Italy,Axa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> – which provides the cover on 
Lloyds's behalf – turned down their claim because they had only booked one 
night's accommodation in London. The pair say Axa's rejection goes against the 
spirit of travel insurance, and contradicts the documents they were given when 
they first signed up for the bank account.

They are the latest Money readers to complain about an insurance product 
provided as part of packaged bank account. "We were going to Lake Garda on a 
rail-based package leaving on Eurostar from London. Because it is not 
physically possible for us to get a train from home and be at St Pancras for 
our mid-morning departure, we travelled up the day before to stay in a hotel as 
many others do each year," says Prue.

The Penzance train they boarded at Plymouth was packed, and in the melee a 
thief managed to steal one of their suitcases. They immediately reported it to 
the train manager, and called Lloyds. CCTV footage later showed a man leaving 
Totnes station with what turned out to be their case.

"We were also told by the police that it was very unlikely they would recover 
it. Obviously we had to do a very hasty shop in London."

The pair, both in their 70s, travelled to Paris the next day and on to Italy. 
When they returned, they claimed the almost £1,000 it cost to replace their 
Samsonsite case and contents. However, they were astonished when their travel 
insurer turned them down.

Axa referred the couple, who have banked with Lloyds TSB for 52 years, to a 
clause in their terms and conditions that states cover is only provided in the 
home area if you have pre-booked at least two consecutive nights accommodation. 
Says Prue: "Since the night's stay in London was part of the trip to Italy we 
feel this is very ambiguous. We took the policy on trust, and feel this 
loophole is not in the spirit of the agreement."

After the Guardian raised the complaint, Axa had a rethink and has decided to 
pay their claim. It told the couple that the person who had dealt with it had 
"misunderstood the wording". It also gave an extra £50 to say sorry.

We asked Axa/Lloyds TSB to clarify the position for other customers who stay a 
single night at a UK hotel, before jetting off in the morning.

A spokeswoman for Axa confirmed that other Lloyds customers are covered for 
single night stays prior to departing abroad.

She pointed us to another term in the policy which says a trip is defined as a 
holiday or journey made to a non-UK destination, and this starts when you leave 
your home. "A claim made from the time you leave your home to the time you get 
back to your home from a non-UK based destination will be covered," she says.

However, if the holiday destination is UK based, then cover will only be 
provided if there are two consecutive nights accommodation booked, she warns.
 