
In the past, a school pupil thinking of going to university would make a 
decision after attending an open day or two and a chat with a careers adviser.

Today, though, a generation that uses smartphones to hook up is equally 
reliant on technology to connect with academia. Rather than the quality of its 
pastoral care, canteens and libraries, a student’s perception of a university 
is largely framed by how well it uses social media.

New research, to be published this year by the department of marketing at 
Bournemouth University <https://www1.bournemouth.ac.uk/>, has found that 
universities are taking the battle to recruit students into the virtual world.

“Many universities now have people whose job it is to deal with social media,” 
said Dr Chris Chapleo, acting head of marketing at the university’s faculty of 
management. “It’s about building closer relationships with students, and 
universities have got a lot better at it.”

Chapleo’s research, based on interviews with social media managers at 30 
universities, found that they considered the three most important platforms for 
reaching students to be Facebook, followed by Instagram and Twitter. “In terms 
of the audience they are trying to talk to — digital natives — social media is 
now their key tool,” Chapleo said.

Many institutions are already very savvy about their use of the technology. 
Staffordshire University <http://www.staffs.ac.uk/> has taken to running 
Snapchat Q&As and Facebook Live Chats, offering virtual tours of its 
accommodation, and Sheffield Hallam University offers places through Facebook, 
with applicants direct messaging their queries.

Others go further, using the technology as a promotional tool. Teesside 
University <https://www.tees.ac.uk/> has commissioned one of its graduates, the 
comedian Joe Tasker, who has 250,000 followers on Twitter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MF7tvttCXvE>, to promote it to school leavers 
in videos on YouTube. And in what was the first, but unlikely to be the last, 
example of its kind, theUniversity of Salford has launched two profiles 
<http://www.salford.ac.uk/news/articles/2016/students-can-find-perfect-match-at-salford>
 on the dating app Tinder, encouraging school leavers to “start a lasting 
relationship with us this September” and to “swipe right to find the course of 
your dreams”.

Such innovations will prove vital in this week’s annual scramble for places, 
when pupils receive their A-level results and some 60,000 of them – around 15% 
of the 450,000 who will go to university this year – rush to secure a course 
through clearing.

Attracting these late recruits is now of paramount importance to universities, 
as a perfect storm threatens to blow through Britain’s campuses. Shifting 
demographics, Brexit, competition from apprenticeships and mounting anxiety 
about rising graduate debt levels mean that Britain’s universities may have 
reached “peak student”, with disastrous consequences for their budgets.

“We’re going to see even more competition between universities because 47% of 
their income comes from tuition fees and there is a limited pool of 
applicants,” said Sorana Vieru,NUS vice-president for  <http://www.nus.org.uk>
higher education.

Some of this is because of population shifts. Put simply, there are fewer 
18-year-olds around than a few years ago. “We’re in a slight dip in the overall 
numbers of year 12s and year 13s and I think we’re going to be in it for five 
to eight years,” said Richard Lewis, managing partner with SMRS, an agency that 
advises universities on how to attract students.

So far, the number of 18-year-olds attending university has remained stable 
despite the decline in their overall numbers. A greater concern for 
universities is the huge decline in the number of mature and part-time 
students. Figuresfrom the Office for Fair Access  <https://www.offa.org.uk>show 
that, between 2009 and 2015, the number of people aged over 21 entering higher 
education fell by 48%, from 339,990 to 177,295. Over the same period, the 
number of part-time entrants also declined massively, from 266,605 to 105,715, 
a 60% decrease. Mounting fears about debt levels appear to lie behind the 
decline. Research by theSutton Trust suggests the typical English student will 
end up with debts of £44,000 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/degrees-of-debt/> upon graduation, 
significantly higher than anywhere else in the English-speaking world, 
including the US. The Trust suggests that almost half of British teenagers 
worry about the amount of money they will owe when they leave university.

Unsurprisingly, an increasing number are coming to the conclusion that an 
apprenticeship might offer a more lucrative career path than a university 
degree.

“In 2014 the number of state-educated pupils who went to university dropped,” 
said Alice Barnard, CEO of the Edge Foundation, an educational charity. “We 
think part of this is due to the fees, but we’d also hope it’s down to 
apprenticeships being part of everyday life. For the first time, you are seeing 
adverts for them on television.” The government has pledged to create three 
million apprenticeships by 2020. “Suddenly, you are seeing this huge range of 
choice of highly skilled apprenticeships and they now have a higher value of 
currency,” she said. “Apprenticeships are seen as something much more 
aspirational.

Apprenticeship levy will go ahead next year, government confirms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
“Young people, those lucky enough to be informed about them, are being a bit 
more savvy. They’re saying, ‘Hang on, where is the value for money from a 
university course?’ When you look at some of the courses for which universities 
are charging the full whack, you really wonder whether it’s morally OK when 
it’s doubtful they are needed by UK plc.”

Barnard says a level-6 apprentice aerospace engineer could earn between 
£20,000 and £24,000 during apprenticeship and go on to earn £30,000 after their 
course. “If you are 18, and by 21 you are earning £28,000, most graduates would 
be pretty satisfied with that.”

Only a few months ago, the UK’s universities could hope to shore up their 
market by looking abroad, but Brexit has knocked their confidence. Experts 
question whether foreign students may prefer to study in a country committed to 
the EU rather than one that has turned its back on their home countries. “There 
has been big growth in the number of EU students coming here, but the 
interesting question, given Brexit, is will they turn up on day one?” asked 
Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute. “What we don’t 
know is whether they might be holding offers from German or French 
universities.”

Lewis said the key was for universities to win over recruits early on, long 
before the mad rush for clearing. “What universities are really focused on now 
is having built up a relationship with students. If they’re already in the 
minds of those students, then they have a far better chance of a successful 
outcome.” Such relationships require deep knowledge of their customer base. 
“Loads of market research is being done on why applicants have turned down a 
certain institution or why they have been the insurance choice rather than the 
first choice,” Vieru said. “Universities are putting quite a bit of money into 
it. All universities are acting more like businesses, getting consumer feedback 
so they can customise their offers in the future.”

Chapleo suggested the approach was paying huge dividends. “The students who 
don’t come to us, we’ve got a pretty good idea of where they do go. The ones 
who apply to us, we’ve got a pretty good idea of where they also apply. We 
survey the market to a high degree in the same way a business would. We know 
who our key competitors are and we try to compete with them and outflank them 
to some degree.” Once, the top-tier universities would not have had to resort 
to such infra dig tactics, but times have changed. The removal of the cap on 
student numbers means that there is no limit on the number of undergraduates 
English universities can recruit.

“Twenty years ago, universities weren’t in competition,” Chapleo said. 
“Something like 5% or 6% of people were going to university. Then, during the 
90s, this increased exponentially to almost 50%. Universities have become more 
like businesses competing with each other, and with all that comes the language 
and behaviour of businesses. They’re in competition to recruit and retain 
students.”

Tales, some apocryphal, some true, of universities offering everything from 
free MA courses to football match tickets, gym memberships and iPads, to those 
who sign up as undergraduates highlight how fierce the competition to recruit 
new students has become.

Universities are tracking their students. Is it clever or creepy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/03/learning-analytics-universities-data-track-students>
But the frenzy by universities to recruit is in danger of damaging higher 
education, Vieru argued. “Their eyes are on recruitment and admission. You get 
students in and then they start complaining that they’re not getting value for 
money for their degree because the universities are not investing in the things 
that make a difference to the student experience afterwards.”

However, as with any market, turbulence creates opportunities. “It’s really 
interesting to look at Ucas advice on this,” Hillman said. “A couple of years 
ago Ucas was saying, ‘Have an ambitious, but realistic, firm offer, but make 
sure your insurance offer has much lower grades, because then if you flunk your 
A-levels you’ll still get your insurance place.’ Now they’re saying, ‘Make your 
firm and insurance offer both quite ambitious, because the grades that 
universities say you need and the grades that they will sometimes accept are 
quite different’.”

Hillman advised students to be bold. “Applicants should decide where they 
really, really, want to go and then do everything they can to try to get there. 
That might very well mean phoning up universities and saying, ‘I flunked a 
grade or two’, but, because universities’ published grades and what they take 
are rather different, and because they’re very much keen to recruit at the 
moment due to all the uncertainty, it is a buyers’ market.”

The rise of the student – and what they must pay

1950 Some 3.4% of people studied in UK higher education, a figure that had 
grown since the late 1940s thanks to government government schemes to support 
former servicemen and women.

1963 The Robbins report called for a huge expansion of university places and 
17 universities were created, including York, Warwick and Sussex. The numbers 
studying full-time in higher education grew from 216,000 in 1962-63 to 457,000 
in 1970-71, according to the Social Market Foundation.

1992 Polytechnics were given permission to become universities, capable of 
awarding their own degrees. By 2000-01, there were 1.3 million students in 
full-time higher education, with the vast majority (1.2 million) studying at 
universities.

1997 The Dearing report recommended students should contribute towards the 
cost of their degree. Tuition fees of £1,000 were introduced in September 1998. 
Tony Blair announced the party’s goal to get 50% of young adults progressing to 
higher education by 2010.

2004 Blair faced a huge backbench rebellion against raising tuition fees to 
£3,000 a year, winning by only five votes.

2011 The number of young people in England entering university reached almost 
50%. In 2011-12, there were 1.7 million in full-time UK higher education.

2012 Tuition fees were tripled to £9,000. In 2013-14, 46.6% of young people in 
England entered higher education.
 