
UN investigators in the Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> have found at least 68 bodies 
spread out across 10 burial mounds in a mass grave on a soccer field in 
Abidjan, the country's commercial capital.

Guillaume Ngefa, the deputy director of the human rights division of the UN 
mission in Ivory Coast, said on Monday the victims were most likely killed by 
soldiers loyal toLaurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> on 12 April, the day after 
the former president was arrested.

Ngefa said in a telephone interview that investigators visited the site on 
Friday and photographed the 10 plots. They interviewed witnesses who described 
the killings as well as family members who identified the dead.

Ngefa said the investigators spoke to two residents of the Yopougon 
neighbourhood, where the incident occurred, who were conscripted by the 
militiamen and forced to bury the dead.

The killings occurred the day after Gbagbo was arrested by the army fighting 
to install the nation's democratically elected leader,Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>.

Yopougon is believed to be where Gbagbo's militias took cover after their 
leader's fall.

The area has historically been a Gbagbo stronghold, but it has pockets 
inhabited by the Djola and Baole, ethnic groups that voted for Ouattara in 
November's divisive election. The victims were almost exclusively from these 
two groups, witnesses said.

Ngefa said the largest grave is believed to hold 31 bodies; another has at 
least 21.

The killings may have been in revenge for the arrest of several dozen 
militiamen who had taken cover inside a Baptist Church in Yopougon, said Ngefa.

The soldiers and foreign mercenaries were rounded up by Ouattara's army. Soon 
after, pro-Gbago gunmen began going door to door in Yopougon, arresting and 
killing perceived supporters of Ouattara, Ngefa said.

On Monday evening, Ouattara's defence spokesman said in a statement that 
pro-Gbagbo militias and mercenaries had killed at least 120 people as they fled 
Abidjan toward the border with neighbouring Liberia. Gbagbo was known to have 
employed Liberian mercenaries in the final months of his rule in a last-ditch 
effort to cling to power.

"The final combatants fighting in the name of ex-president Laurent Gbagbo were 
Liberian mercenaries and Ivorian militiamen," said the statement signed by 
Defence Spokesman Captain Leon Kouakou Alla. "As they fled they practised, in 
the departments of Toulepleu, Blolequin, Guiglo and Duekoue, a scorched earth 
policy nothing should exist after they had come through," the statement said.

Gbagbo's refusal to cede power after losing the November election in Ivory 
Coast sent the west African nation into a spiral of violence. More than 1,000 
civilians were killed, first by the army controlled by Gbagbo and later by a 
former rebel group allied with Ouattara that seized control of the country and 
toppled Gbagbo.
 