
It is too early to say what will happen with the summer. By this time last 
year I was beginning to wonder if the low cloud and omnipresent drizzle would 
ever lift. Clients with meadows phoned up in disappointment as they splayed and 
matted, and the garden sat heavy and dank, one thing leaning into the next and 
bowing heavy under the excess of rain. Flowers failed to open, their petals 
fused together with mould, and the tomatoes were withered by blight in a matter 
of days. It was a heavenly year for the slugs and snails - organic pellets, 
nematodes and night picking were nothing to them.

But there were triumphs, too, and the rain was a bonus for all the new 
plantings I had put in the previous winter. I can see the results of the little 
saplings that never went thirsty and the newly sown meadows. They were out of 
the blocks this spring with a lust for life, proving that juggling the swings 
and the roundabouts is simply part of what we have to contend with if we set 
out to shape nature to our own ends.

You have only to look at the results of last year's meadows to see that, to 
most plants, water is the single most important thing you need to get right in 
the garden in the summer months. By the same token, I will be setting my garden 
up so that it can contend with the wet year and also adapt to a dry one, and I 
have to keep an open mind in the matter, because it is the nature of gardening 
that we will always be in for a failure or two. Success in this matter - or 
what some people refer to as green fingers - is usually nothing more than 
keeping your eyes open.

I am being put to the test on my allotment, because we are more or less 
without water. There is a tap, but it is miles away and uncoiling a hose to 
reach it is not an option, as it has to negotiate the pavements and the local 
kids who see it as a fine chance for play. To get around the issue we have an 
old water tank, and I like the discipline of harvesting the rainwater, Heath 
Robinson fashion. The sheet of corrugated plastic I have used to catch the rain 
is not an aesthetic arrangement, but you can get away with murder in the line 
of growing to eat. I like the rigour of gardening with available resources, but 
I only feel confident in doing this because I have put so much into the soil.

This time last year when I took the allotment on, it was running low in terms 
of organic matter, so I sowed a green manure crop last autumn to redress the 
balance and added a good load of compost at the end of March, when I dug in the 
green manure. Although I am now late with the veg, as I had to wait at least 
two weeks for the green manure to start to decompose, I can already see the 
benefits. The soil is darker and richer, and so far I have only had to water 
when I have sown the seed. I do this because it settles the soil around the 
seed and flushes the little beads into life. Watering less will encourage the 
roots down into the ground to seek out the moisture where it is held in the 
newly applied humus. Herein lies one of the main secrets of water conservation, 
and once the vegetables are large enough to cope I will water them well and 
apply mulch around their crowns. Mulching works wonders in the flowerbeds and 
allows me to rely on the hose as a last resort, so there's no reason why it 
shouldn't be applied in the veggie garden, too. The sweet peas, the climbing 
beans and the courgettes will be the first recipients of this special 
treatment, and I know they will thank me for it.

A couple of years ago, before last year's washout, we had to cope with a 
hosepipe ban, so it makes sense to have a range of plants that can cope with 
all eventualities. The drought-loving Gaura lindheimeri were one of the 
greatest successes. It was their moment, and, along with the kniphofias and the 
salvias, they didn't look back. Though recent forecasts that viticulture might 
only be possible in the north of the UK in 50 years' time are not something I 
care to dwell upon, I am gardening more and more with the possibility that we 
will have to know how to garden on the dry side.

In terms of applying energies carefully, I have learned not to expect the 
garden to be singing and dancing in all departments, all of the time. It is 
important to allow downtime in the beds, and to be able to turn your back when 
things are bedraggled. I make up for this with groups of pots around the 
garden, and I make myself water these by hand so that I only grow as much as I 
can look after in the half hour before breakfast. This is important waking-up 
time and watering by hand allows me to look at each of the plants as 
individuals. The scented-leaved pelargoniums only need the can every other day, 
and I can use the off-days to deadhead and to titivate. The brugmansia, hungry 
beast that it is, and the nicotiana need water daily. I never mind, and choose 
to water these in the evening to take in the heady evening perfume. My payback 
for keeping my eyes open.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>

Observer offer  Readers can buy either the Gaura lindheimeri 'Siskiyou Pink', 
with its bright pink flowers, or the white-flowered 'Whirling Butterfly' for 
just £9.95 incl p&p, or both for £15.90 incl p&p - a saving of £4. Call 0870 
836 0909, quoting ref OBDP084, or send a cheque made payable to Observer Reader 
Offers with your order to Observer Gaura Lindheimeri Offer, OBDP084, Rookery 
Farm, Joys Bank, Holbeach St Johns, Spalding PE12 8SG. Price includes UK 
mainland p&p. Dispatch within 28 days. Plants supplied in 9cm pots

Blog 

For regular updates on our allotment's progress, new films, pictures and 
slideshows, and to share your gardening comments, questions and advice, visit
blogs.theguardian.com/allotment <http://blogs.theguardian.com/allotment>
 