
On Monday, Aaron Porter announced that he would not run again for the NUS 
presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/feb/21/nus-president-student-cuts>
 – effectively resigning from the position after just one year in the role. His 
resignation is welcome, and reflects a vast shift of power within the student 
movement. For the first time in a generation, students are a serious force in 
British politics.

Porter's predecessor, Wes Streeting, always used to quip that student politics 
were so vicious because the stakes were so low. Whatever one's personal views 
on the man, if truth be told, the leadership of NUS have for months been 
outsiders to their own movement. The campus occupations that sprang up over 
last term; the mobilisation of 130,000 students on 24 November; themass 
demonstration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/dec/01/student-protests-day-three?intcmp=239>
 on the day of the parliamentary vote; and then a revival of the movement, 
unexpected from some quarters, on 29 January – all were organised independently 
of, if not in defiance of, the NUS leadership.

The National Campaign Against Fees and Cuts <http://anticuts.com/> (NCAFC), an 
organisation of barely 200 students before the first national demonstration, 
became a linchpin for the movement, as the NUS failed either to realise or to 
support the sheer scale of what was happening. In an email sent to local 
officers just after the demonstration on 10 November, Porter stated that he was 
"of the belief that the actions of NCAFC could now be a risk to our wider 
objectives". Porter has since been chased off the streets twice by his own 
members, in Manchester and Glasgow.

With or without the NUS, the movement will continue. The government's reforms 
to higher education last year were an attempt to fundamentally shift the value 
and purpose of universities. With a tripling of tuition fees and a 79% cut to 
the teaching grant, they constitute a privatisation of teaching and a 
prioritisation of research quality over the social mission of higher education. 
Less prestigious universities, overwhelmingly populated with students from 
lower socio-economic backgrounds, will be unable to raise funds from research 
or vast fee increases, and will be forced to downsize, merge and close.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> will become consumers of 
education. One of the few free spaces left in British life is to be subjected 
to the logic of the market.

The government's education reforms, and their austerity measures across the 
public sector, come precisely at the moment at which they are politically 
untenable. They constitute not just an attack on ordinary people, but a 
desperate re-affirmation of neoliberal policies, designed ostensibly to reduce 
a budget deficit which was caused by precisely the same deregulation and 
privatisation. The Trade Union Congress national demonstration on 26 March will 
see vast numbers on the streets of London. Students will once again be at the 
forefront of direct action and mass mobilisation.

It is in this context that the recent direction of NUS has seemed so futile. 
Its support for a graduate tax, rather than opposing any kind of fees, has seen 
it shying away from any kind of ideological confrontation in favour of a high 
level lobbying strategy. The recent fees briefing sent to local NUS affiliates, 
and later leaked to the Times, was consistent with an attitude that once 
parliament passed the fee rise, all that students could do was bargain for 
"value for money". The NUS's unwillingness to keep up the fight illustrates 
where the real dividing lines now are between the bureaucracy and the movement 
in the streets.

The NCAFC and other groups have called for another day of action on 24 
February to coincide with the national meeting ofUniversities UK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/Pages/Default.aspx>, the vice-chancellors' 
organisation. We are determined to struggle against the managers and directors 
who have made deep cuts to their institutions and accepted vast salaries for 
themselves, while cheerleading the privatisation of higher education. At UCL, 
where the provost has been calling for higher fees for years, undergraduate and 
postgraduate fees are likely to sky-rocket. Meanwhile, the college has more 
managers paid over £100,000 than any other university in the sector.

Now, with cuts biting every community and public service in the UK, the 
possibility for a full-blown confrontation between the government and an 
anti-austerity movement has become concrete. The University and Colleges Union 
is due to lead the way with a national ballot for strike action in late March. 
On lecturers' picket lines across the country, in local communities and on our 
campuses, the student movement has proved and will prove that it has not 
disappeared.

Unless the NUS changes radically at its national conference in April, there is 
a risk that it may become terminally sundered from that movement. Welcome as 
Porter's resignation is, we must now look to an entirely new generation of 
student leaders. Never before have the stakes been so high.
 