
Being unemployed and looking for work is the hardest job there is. It requires 
self-motivation, planning, bravery and hard graft, while often being under 
pressure financially, emotionally and mentally. But there are a number of 
tactics you can employ that will help you remain focused and upbeat, while also 
improving your employment prospects.

Here are my five top tips:

Volunteer

Offering your skills, knowledge and time for free can have major benefits for 
job seekers. For example, it can break the isolation by getting you back into a 
team-work environment, or improve your self-esteem that may have been damaged.

Employers like to see that people have remained busy and focused inbetween 
jobs, especially if the volunteering role is related to the field. For example, 
an accountant could spend one day a week book-keeping for a community group or 
an an IT professional might act as a consultant for local school looking to 
spruce up their website. This looks considerably better on a CV than a blank 
three months.

Job seekers should think about what skills they can offer, how much time they 
can commit to voluntary work, what kinds of voluntary work they would like to 
do and what kinds of organisations they would like to be a part of. No one is 
expecting a life-long commitment but it's important to choose a voluntary 
activity that benefits both parties.

Network

Some of the best jobs are found by the most effective networkers. Networking 
can uncover job opportunities, arm you with first-rate intelligence to help you 
shine during the interview process, or lead to a foot-in-the-door.

The recent networking guide 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/networking-how-to-guide> is a great 
pleace to start if you need help networking. The 24-7-30 rule – which urges 
networkers to follow up new connections within a day, a week and a month to 
ensure the relationship is bedded in – is particularly useful.

Our networks come in two parts: the existing network, such as friends, family, 
ex-colleagues, college chums etc, and then the potential network, which is yet 
to be made. Start with the existing network, reconnect with people, be social 
and be helpful. Then establish where there are gaps in your network and start 
meeting people at events, conferences and seminars.

Take a Break

If you were employed, would you work non-stop with no breaks, no weekends off 
and no holidays? Of course not, and it doesn't change when you become a 
full-time, un-salaried job hunter. A lack of money can curtail any plans for a 
getaway but there are numerous ways job hunters can build in some respite for 
themselves and their family.

Keep weekends and evenings clear of any job hunting activity. When it gets to 
6pm, switch off the computer, step away from the internet and focus on other 
things. Taking regular breaks during the day as if you were at work too; go for 
a walk, eat your lunch away from the desk and refuel the batteries – this way 
you'll have a much more productive afternoon.

If you're considering taking a more significant holiday, be mindful of the 
recruitment calendar. Typical quiet times are around normal holiday seasons 
such as Christmas, Easter and mid-late summer. Try to fit your own break into 
these times as decision-makers and hirers are also likely to absent.

Consider freelancing

When unemployed, most people envisage getting back into work fairly quickly 
and on similar basis to their previous post. But you need to be more flexible 
in your thinking and perhaps consider freelancing while looking for a permanent 
salary. Freelancing is a great way to keep skills sharp, increase networks, 
earn income and enhance the CV.

Signing up with couple of specialist interim agencies is a good start for any 
senior professionals – theInterim Management Association 
<http://www.interimmanagement.uk.com/> is a useful resource for those looking 
for more information on this.

For job seekers looking for work at mid-management levels and below, talk to 
some of the more generalist recruitment agencies in your area or sector; 
they'll often have separate consultants who deal with permanent and freelance 
contracts. Make sure you're seen by both and they know what you're looking for. 
TheRecruitment & Employment Confederation 
<https://www.rec.uk.com/membersarea/directory/default.asp?dir=1> has a good 
website to locate an approved agency.

Just make sure that if what you really want to do is get back into full-time 
and permanent employment that the demands of freelancing don't get in the way 
of your real ambition.

Do an online audit

Articles on the importance (and dangers) of online and social media presence 
for job seekers are legion. Increasingly, companies are recruiting on platforms 
such as Facebook, Twitter and Linkedin, and job seekers can find opportunities 
in these digital spaces. It's extremely important that your online profile 
benefits your jobhunt, not jeopardises it.

For instance, check your privacy settings on Facebook and ensure there are no 
embarrassing photos or comments that might be seen by employers. Be mindful of 
what you tweet or retweet; social bravado and criticism of past employers, for 
example, won't endear you to a company seeking a new recruit.

Take time to polish up your profiles. Are they full of the sort of information 
– such as your qualifications and contact details – that will help employers 
find you? Does your Linkedin photo look professional? Is your online network 
matching your real life network and being leveraged for new opportunities or 
insightful information?

Robert Wright is a recruitment consultant for TJ Peel Resourcing 
<http://www.tjpeel.com/>. You can follow him on LinkedIn 
<http://www.linkedin.com/in/robmwright> or Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/robmwright>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update and 
free careers ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 