
Workers who have been made redundant could find themselves fined by their bank 
if they hold a "best-buy" current account.

Most banks offer at least one account that offers favourable rates of interest 
and other perks for those who pay in their salary or, typically, a minimum 
£1,000 each month.

But with unemployment fast heading for 3m, increasing numbers of people who 
opened these accounts will find them hard to maintain in a recession.

Banks with these accounts include Abbey, Alliance & Leicester, Lloyds TSB, 
Halifax and First Direct.

In the majority of cases, you will automatically lose the benefits of the 
account if you can no longer meet the funding requirement. And you could find 
yourself unexpectedly paying for your account.

First Direct customers will be hit the hardest as it charges £10 a month to 
current account holders who do not pay in £1,500.

Customers with Alliance & Leicester's Premier or Premier Direct current 
account could also end up paying if they do not ditch the account. A&L requires 
a minimum monthly funding of £500. Advantages of the accounts include up to 6% 
for balances in credit and a no-interest overdraft.

But if you fail to make the minimum payment you will be charged an 
"underfunding fee" of £5 a month, although there is a three-month's grace 
before this kicks in. "We proactively contact customers in advance to advise 
that alternative products are available which do not have a minimum funding 
requirement," a spokesman for the bank said. "Switching accounts is simple and 
has no inconvenience for the customer."

Melanie Brown, an A&L Premier account customer, was recently made redundant 
and asked the bank if she could temporarily suspend the £500 required funding. 
"They said no, and that if I did I would be charged a fee but that I could 
downgrade to a standard current account," she says. "The main perk I've lost is 
the linkage to a Plus saver account which was quite handy for moving money in 
and out. I was disappointed, but not surprised, by their lack of flexibility 
given that I am a loyal customer who has several accounts with them."

At other banks, customers are not charged but lose any benefits. With the 
Halifax Reward account, for example, the minimum funding is £1,000 a month. In 
return for this your account is credited with £5 a month. If you don't pay in 
the £1,000 you don't get the fiver.

If you have Halifax's somewhat misleadingly named High Interest current 
account that pays 1% on balances in credit, you get 0.1% if you fail to pay in 
£1,000 or more a month. Your overdraft rate also increases from 15.9% to 19.5%.

The case is similar with Lloyds TSB. "If you don't deposit £1,000 a month into 
the Classic Plus account you get 0.1% interest instead of 2.5%," a spokeswoman 
for the bank said.

As five out of the six "best-buy" current accounts now require minimum funding 
to get a decent credit interest or overdraft rate, choices for those who cannot 
meet minimum funding are limited. The best option that doesn't require a 
minimum is from Cahoot. It pays 1% on balances in credit and charges 11.8% on 
an authorised overdraft. If you are not likely to have much in your account, 
however, it may not be worth making the move.

Those who have lost their job could also find themselves paying more on their 
car insurance at renewal time. Website uSwitch estimates a change in 
"occupational status" will typically add 20% to someone's car insurance 
premiums.

"If you are in the unfortunate position of being made redundant the first 
thing you must do is go through your finances with a fine-tooth comb and make 
sure you can still get the same deal if you no longer receive a monthly 
salary," said Louise Bond, personal finance expert at uSwitch.
 