
The Reserve Bank is likely to keep interest rates on hold at its next monthly 
meeting despite an unexpected rise in the unemployment rate to 6% in January.

The total number of people with jobs fell by 7,900 in the month, according to 
statistics released by theAustralian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> on 
Thursday. The number of people with jobs had been expected to increase by 
15,000.


Full-time employment fell by 40,600, while the number of part-time jobs was up 
by 32,700.

Australia's unemployment falls to 5.8%, the lowest rate for 20 months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/australias-unemployment-figures-fall-to-58-catching-market-by-surprise>
But JP Morgan economist Tom Kennedy said that while the result was 
disappointing, it was not a bad enough to prompt a change from the RBA.

“You’ll probably see this range between 5.8 and 6.2% in the jobless rate for 
the next half year to a year,” he said. “There’s no trigger for [the RBA] to 
ease in the near term.

“We know the RBA don’t pin too much significance on just one print, they’re 
looking at how things play out over a six-month time horizon.”

The Asutralian share market brushed off the poor data, with the ASX/S&P 200 
index continuing its run of gains by rising more than 2% to stand at 4,984 
points at 2pm on Thursday. The Australian dollar dropped slightly on the news 
before making a recovery to US71.65c.

The participation rate, which refers to the number of people either employed 
or actively looking for work, was steady at 65.2 per cent..


Tasmania and South Australia performed the worst of the states, with the 
unemployment rate sitting at 6.5 and 6.8% respectively. New South Wales was the 
strongest performer at 5.5%.

Economists had predicted the national jobless rate would stay at 5.8% but it 
instead rose to its highest level since September although the trend rate was 
seen as still being downwards.

Craig James, chief economist at CommSec, said: “The outlook for the job market 
remains positive, with lead indicators like vacancies and job ads still rising.”

The figures came as a think-tank said Australia was unlikely to face a 
recession in 2016 but weak national income poses risks to the economy.

In its 2016 economic and political outlook, the Committee for Economic 
Development of Australia says falling commodity prices will impact how income 
weakness plays out, while business confidence is unlikely to improve with the 
politicking in this election year.

“This has the potential to have serious implications for the economy,” said 
Stephen Martin, the chief executive of CEDA.
 