
Heather Watson's progress in the Australian junior event has provided further 
evidence of a bright future for the British women's game, though she might have 
made it as a swimmer before she opted for tennis.

The 16-year-old Watson, who defeated Japan's Miyabi Inoue 7–6 (7–1), 4–6, 6–4 
to joinLaura Robson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-robson> in the 
quarter-finals, was born in Guernsey and is based at the Bollettieri Academy in 
Florida.

Her father, Ian, said yesterday: "She is a very athletic girl. They were 
distraught at the swimming club when she chose to concentrate on tennis. I 
remember her picture was in the local paper once after she'd won the freestyle, 
breaststroke, butterfly and backstroke events for her age group at a gala."

While Robson, the fifth seed, was expected to do well, Watson's progress has 
been more of a surprise, although she has a world junior ranking of 13 and was 
seeded nine in Melbourne. She played the third seed, Ksenia Pervak of Russia, 
in a quarter-final earlier today.

Watson recalled when, in 2000, he and his wife first realised their daughter 
was good at tennis. "She was only seven and put her name down, unknown to us, 
for a short tennis tournament at our club. She came to tell us she'd got 
through the first round, then the second, and finally she came out and said, 
'Oh, I've won the final'. After that we just nurtured her talent."

Her progress was such that in 2004 she went to the Bollettieri Academy in 
Bradenton, Florida. She is coached there by the Peruvian Percy Melzi.

Her parents considered sending her to a British academy but did not feel easy 
about the marriage of "academia and sport". They had heard of the Bollettieri 
centres and decided to find out more.

"We left her at Bollettieri's for a week and told her we weren't going to 
contact her at all while she was there," Watson said. "When we picked her up 
she said, 'Dad, I want to come here'.

"When she went she was so mature and independent we never once got a call of 
complaint from her."

For four years she lived in the dormitories but for the past 18 months her 
mother has been living with her in Florida and has been with her in Melbourne 
for theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>."
 