
A sensor inside Unilever's Lifebuoy soap bar is going to help the company 
change how millions of customers behave.

It's just one of the innovations the company is using to meet its goal of 
doubling in size while reducing its environmental impact.

The sheer size and range of this multinational company means that linking the 
success of its sustainable living plan to its business goals guarantees change 
will happen.

Unilever sells 150m products a day and 53% of its business comes from emerging 
markets, so sustainability is critical to the company's future.

The company launched its new business vision in 2010 promising to make people 
healthier, better off and halve the environmental footprint of its products by 
2020. Its supply chain is the key.

Delivering the plan is a personal work objective for the chief executive and 
key senior managers, such as the chief procurement officer. Brand leadership 
teams, manufacturing sites, offices and research centres worldwide are all 
responsible for reaching targets.

The soap bar sensor is part of research on consumer behaviour. This is where 
Unilever believes it can have most impact – in healthy eating, better hygiene, 
and in cutting the amount of water and energy people use. It is examining 
triggers that make consumers choose sustainable products and which education 
programmes work.

It has given teams creating new products tools to evaluate environmental 
impact early in the innovation phase. Unilever's research and development team 
is seeking solutions to the biggest environmental challenges.

The plan is already showing results. By the end of 2010 Lifebuoy soap had 
reached 125 million people with handwashing education programmes. Global 
handwashing day 2010 reached 50 organisations in 19 countries. More than 5.4 
million people have taken the heart age test online and a brush day and night 
campaign reached more than 10 million people in 2010.

Unilever's Pureit in-home water purifier is also providing affordable drinking 
water to some of the world's poorest communities and giving them a solution 
that's cheaper than boiling water or buying it in bottles.

The business now sources 10% of all agricultural raw materials sustainably and 
aims to source 100% by 2020.Twenty percent of its tea is also sourced 
sustainably – helping 38,000 farmers achieve certification and boost their 
income. Nearly a third of Unilever' palm oil is also sourced sustainably.

By 2020 the company also plans to make safe drinking water available to half a 
billion people, bring 500,000 smallholders and small-scale distributors into 
the supply chain, improve hygiene in Asia, Africa and Latin America, and double 
the proportion of Unilever food that meets the highest nutritional standards.

Crucially, Unilever believes it will achieve change on such a large scale 
because of its size and global reach and will have a deeper insight because of 
10 years of careful preparatory work ahead of the plan's launch.

Unilever says it knows the issues it is facing because it has measured the 
environmental impact of 1,600 of its products, representing some 70% of its 
overall sales volume.

But it also knows it does not have all the answers. Working with customers, 
suppliers, governments and NGOs is therefore central to achieving the 50 goals 
and targets it has set itself in its sustainable living plan.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 