
Is every university proud of the careers and employability service it is 
providing? Is it working for every different type of student and graduate? Does 
it reflect the ever changing world of work? If it is a comprehensive service, 
is it actually being used? Against an unprecedented, underemployed generation, 
careers advisers in higher education hold the keys to the future of bright 
young adults.

And so, to an extent, do their alumni, with whom forward-thinking universities 
must surely now be developing and maintaining the tightest and most 
well-managed of relationships at the earliest possible opportunity, not to 
mention with those alumni's employers. If this isn't happening yet, it's a 
serious missed opportunity.

This isn't sensationalism. The gateway to employability is focused through the 
careers centres of universities because not enough courses have it woven into 
the curriculum. It's not a recognised feature at all levels of the student 
experience. Only when the time draws near in students' third or fourth year do 
they wake up and search out that advice. This too is where alumni come in.

Without fail, we should rethink alumni associations as, firstly, a coaching 
network and, secondly, as a fundraising resource. Attempts to tap alumni for 
funds shouldn't be prioritised over the kind of contribution that significantly 
enhances the employability of future graduates. I believe that alumni should be 
actively encouraged by advisers to return more than once (with all dialogue and 
visits tracked – these are, after all, our ambassadors) to offer personal 
real-world insights from a graduate perspective and (only then) as an 
invaluable professional partner.

Graduates should be encouraged to have a duty of responsibility back to their 
alma mater, not just as individual mentors, but also in bringing their business 
into the fold. Ideally, this would feature not only presence at open days, 
seminars and panel events, but increasingly, practical one-to-one or small 
group mentoring, preferably involving their own employers in engaging with 
students. This certainly happens in pockets, but not extensively enough, and 
it's arguably the part that needs to be cultivated the most.

Of course, this approach assumes that outgoing undergraduates (who themselves 
have been using the careers service) have enjoyed and benefited from their 
overall student experience. So much so that they are inspired enough to return 
once their working life has begun and share their 'path' with those a year or 
two behind them. It also assumes that the current careers service has an 
efficient system in place for tracking who these individuals are before they 
leave and has a file of contact details and topic areas they'd be willing to 
speak about – a fait accompli for some, food for thought for others perhaps.

As for whom exactly to engage, recent alumni should be targeted as much as, if 
not more than, the more financially stable older generations. Newer alumni have 
more recent, relevant experience of getting started in a career, which is what 
graduates want to hear about in the current economic climate. This should be 
prioritised over advice and tips on career progression.

Talks by and events showcasing alumni should not only involve the 'successful' 
big earners from big firms, but also feature and highlight graduates who chose 
an unusual or innovative career-finding path. For example, the Durham student 
who got a job by standing outside a bank in London with a placard reading: 
"Just graduated from Durham and looking for a job in insurance".

Before all of this, current students and new alumni could be given specific 
opportunities to suggest what they would like to give and get from these 
relationships. What help would students most like to receive and in what ways 
are alumni willing to volunteer their precious time?

Conscientious universities may wish to find innovative ways to give something 
back to their alumni (rather than simply absorbing their funds and career 
advice), and could even provide long term value for money for fees by setting 
up a rewards system. They could offer employed alumni awards in recognition of 
their help and perhaps offer unemployed, recent alumni the chance ofspecialised 
coaching <http://www.ewopened.com/> in order to regain confidence and create a 
more meaningful plan.

Imagine if a university could harness the total population of alumni behind a 
mission and not just one at a time – how powerful and inspiring that would be. 
This all presupposes that they've had a positive and useful experience, 
throughout their degree course and in their career seeking – and therein lies 
the challenge for current and incoming adviser.

We need to reframe and re-energise the 'mission' of alumni in a way that makes 
previous graduates feel useful and valuable as opposed to acting as a piggy 
bank that does occasional talks. Lots of cultural shifts in institutions 
require intense governance and funds; this doesn't. It is simply a call to arms 
to involve our valuable alumni more innovatively in helping our current tranche 
of despondent and often directionless undergraduates become more employable, 
create more meaningful career paths and most importantly, not waste 10,000 
working days.

Alastair Creamer is co-founder of Eyes Wide Opened <http://www.ewopened.com>, 
a coaching programme for graduates – follow it on Twitter@ewopened 
<https://twitter.com/ewopened>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 