
When you start university, you'll find the way you study changes. School 
textbooks are replaced with academic journals, classrooms are swapped for giant 
lecture halls and "referencing" becomes a familiar chore.

Humanities students will notice the biggest difference when they're handed 
their university timetable – there's far less teaching time than at school or 
college. This means you can enjoy a lot more freedom, says Ian Shrimpton, a 
second-year philosophy student at Reading University.

"When you're set an essay you're given a recommended reading list, but the 
rest is up to you – it's not like at school where you're bound by a curriculum. 
There's quite a wide variety of lectures on offer, so you pick the ones that 
you find interesting."

But there are some formal standards you have to stick to. Universities expect 
you to present your work professionally. This means any books you have used 
when researching your assignments need to be cited, either in the footnotes to 
your work or at the end in a bibliography.

This can be a bit tedious, says Sophie Murray-Morris, a third-year English 
student at Birmingham University. "When you finish an essay you think: 'Yay! 
It's over; I'm done!' But then you realise that you have to do your 
bibliography."

And getting it right is quite tricky, she says. "When we were set our first 
essay, we were given a 10-page guide to referencing, which was a bit daunting. 
There are different rules for citing books, journals and websites, and you have 
to get it spot-on. Even by having a comma in the wrong place you risk losing 
marks."

Universities also expect students to be exact when it comes to meeting 
deadlines, says Charlotte Britton, welfare officer at Swansea University 
students union. "Tutors can tell if work is handed in late, either because you 
have to submit it online, or because it has to be handed in at your 
departmental office.

"It varies from uni to uni, but a late hand-in can mean anything from getting 
10% knocked off your work to getting zero marks, depending on how late it is."

But tutors recognise that first year is tough, says Thomas Joyce, professor of 
orthopaedic engineering at Newcastle University. "In our school every student 
is allocated a tutor who can offer guidance if a student wants to check their 
progress."

If you're starting university, he says work hard and enjoy your studies, but 
don't be shy about asking for support.

• This story was changed on 04.10.12 to clarify that Charlotte Britton is 
welfare officer at Swansea University, not Cardiff University
 