
Campus

This is the geographic area where all the buildings connected to a university 
or college are located. For some "campus universities" this can also include 
student accommodation – great for rolling out of bed into the library – while 
others have their buildings and accommodation spread out over a wider area

College degrees accredited by a university

Many further education colleges offer stand-alone courses accredited by and in 
partnership with universities that have degree-awarding powers. For example, if 
you complete a foundation degree in forensic science at Weymouth College the 
qualification will be awarded to you by Bournemouth university. You could then 
go on to complete a full degree by dropping into the final year of a higher 
education 'top-up' course in the same field.

Tip: Further education colleges tend to offer lower course fees, so this can 
be a more affordable route to getting a degree

Distance learning

This is when online and printed course materials, combined with tutorial 
support – online, face-to-face and by telephone – replaces campus-based 
teaching. Will Swann, director of students at the Open University, which 
specialises in this kind of learning, says: "Students could have a full-time 
job, family commitments or have a disability. Some younger students may want to 
'earn and learn' by starting their career at the same time as they study. We 
even have six members of Team GB from the 2012 Olympics currently studying with 
us because they really need that flexibility"

Freshers' week

This is the name given to the first week of university, when hordes of nervous 
and excited new students descend on the campus. As well as being an important 
time to settle in, register and choose your modules, it is better known for 
non-stop parties and the chance to get to get to know your new peers. Zoe 
Bulaitis, editor of Exeter's student newspaper, remembers hers as: "socialising 
until your jaw hurts from talking… worth it in the end though!"

Halls of residence

"Halls" are the accommodation offered by a university, mainly for first-year 
students. Traditionally involving long corridors with lots of small bedrooms 
and a big canteen for meals, many halls now consist of blocks of self-catered 
flats.

Tip: Think carefully about what type of halls would suit your personal needs 
best and apply early to avoid disappointment

Lecturer/professor

"Lecturer is the starting level teaching job at a university," says Charlotte 
Hodes, who was made a Professor of Fine Art at the London College of Fashion 
this spring. "Professorships are either awarded as part of a high level role at 
a university or as an acknowledgement of an outstanding achievement in their 
field. Lecturers usually have more contact with the students, especially at 
starting level, but don't think that a lecturer isn't experienced either – you 
can get a lot out of them if you try!"

Lecture/seminar

A lecture is a simple presentation in which a tutor will explain an aspect of 
a particular subject while students learn by listening and taking notes. 
Seminars are more interactive and often involve questions and tasks being put 
forward by the tutor. Importantly, seminars involve more critical debate and 
discussion led by the students. While the back row of a lecture theatre can be 
a point of salvation for a late-runner, turning up 20 minutes into a 
five-person seminar is definitely not recommended...

LNAT

The National Admissions Test for Law is an aptitude test designed specially to 
assess whether a candidate has potential to study law at undergraduate level. 
It is a multiple-choice exam that judges candidates on the verbal reasoning 
skills that are critical to legal studies. It is used in conjunction with 
A-levels and the rest of a candidate's Ucas application to decide more fairly 
who to accept on to a course.

Tip: Familiarise yourself with the style of exam by taking practice exams on 
the LNAT webpage:lnat.ac.uk <http://www.lnat.ac.uk>

Master's

Once you have completed your undergraduate degree, you may decide to move on 
to postgraduate study. If so, then a master's degree is likely to be what you 
end up doing. A master's is more in-depth, specialised in a particular academic 
field or professional practice, and involves far more independent learning

Personal statement

This is a really important chance to add a bit of personality to your Ucas 
application. It is an opportunity to explain why you are the right person for 
the course, demonstrate your enthusiasm and give some insight into your other 
interests and hobbies

PhD

The highest level academic award. These are research-based, and a successful 
PhD student will make an original contribution to the knowledge of their 
subject. Recipients also earn the title of doctor on completion

Reading week

This is a short period of time away from teaching, usually before exams, and 
is a chance for students to catch up with the reading for their course or get 
started on that all-important revision

Russell group

This is an association of 24 universities that have some of the best 
reputations for research and teaching in the UK. All of the six "red-brick" 
universities, which include Manchester, Leeds and Bristol, are in the Russell 
Group, as are more modern institutions such as Exeter and York. These 
universities are very popular with students and entry to some courses can be 
highly competitive

Sandwich course/ joint honours

A sandwich degree is a four-year undergraduate course in which students spend 
a year in industry, or on a relevant placement. A joint honours degree is when 
two subjects are studied simultaneously, merging aspects of each within the 
same period of time as a single honours

Student services

Your go-to point for information and advice relating to the practical matters 
of university life. This is where you need to go if you require financial help 
or advice, academic or emotional support, or need to replace your lost student 
card…again

Student society

Societies, or "socs" are facilitated by your students' union and are groups or 
clubs for people who share specific interests. From sport to media, art to 
politics, there can be hundreds of cheap-to-join societies at a university

Students' union

These "exist to change students' lives for the better," says Liam Burns, NUS 
president. "They represent you at university, providing welfare services, 
entertainment and social activities such as clubs, societies, music venues and 
bars. Students' unions are democratic bodies, so their leaders and policies are 
decided by you. If you think your union could be run better or do more for 
students, get involved and change it. It could change your life"

Tariff system

To accommodate the broad range of qualifications that university applicants 
may have, Ucas uses a points-based system to help admissions tutors compare 
students. Every different type of qualification and the grade achieved is 
allocated a certain number of points. Each course will require either a certain 
number of tariff points, or minimum grades at A-level, for example: 300 points, 
or grades ABB

Types of degrees

When someone refers to their "degree" they usually mean their bachelor's 
degree, which is awarded after the completion of an undergraduate course. The 
two main types of degree are: BA, which is a bachelor of arts; and BSc, which 
is awarded for science, but there are many other types with similar 
abbreviations. Most bachelor's degrees in the UK are awarded with honours, or 
(hons), according to the grade you receive

Ucas

The University and Colleges Admissions service: processes more than 2m 
applications for full-time undergraduate courses each year using a special 
online system. Prospective students fill in online their qualifications, 
personal statements and the universities they hope to attend. Your account will 
be updated when you receive your offers
 