
Choosing where to live at university can seem like a minefield of tricky 
decisions with the potential to make or break a student experience – catered or 
non-catered, town or campus, large flat or small, ensuite or shared bathroom?

Vivienne Robinson, accommodation manager at Newcastle University, advises new 
students not to sweat the small stuff: "Provided you can afford the 
accommodation, try not to get too fixated on one specific residence – you'll 
have a great student experience at whichever site you're allocated to."

That said, it's not a choice to take lightly. Research, says Robinson, is key; 
find out all that you can on university websites, in brochures and, ideally, on 
visit days. Bear in mind that photography can be misleading, and there's really 
no substitute for seeing the rooms for yourself.

Narrow down the big questions first. Mixed-gender accommodation isn't for 
everyone, and if you'd rather stick with your own sex, that might make your 
decision for you. Keep your budget in mind – ensuite bathrooms and proximity to 
university will push prices up. If you couldn't bear to share a bathroom with 
strangers but it wouldn't phase you to get a bus into lectures every morning, 
then you know what to prioritise.

When it comes to catering, cost is less of an issue, explains Robinson, as 
there will likely be little difference in price between buying your own food 
and paying for it inclusively. Instead, go with what appeals to you more – 
catered students don't have to worry about grocery shopping, cooking or all the 
extra cleaning, which can be a blessing for those with heavy timetables or 
during exam time. But for students with dietary requirements or who 
particularly enjoy cooking, self-catered is a great, flexible option.

Standards

Try not to listen to horror stories about the state of university 
accommodation. Yes, the quality does vary across the board, but all halls of 
residence have to meet a national code (UUK or ANUK), so you're assured of a 
certain standard. Besides, there are plenty of advantages university 
accommodation has over privately renting in your first year. It's where you'll 
forge your first friendships with other students, and most will have facilities 
onsite – anything from a laundry room and a vending machine to bars and 
recreation rooms. Most universities offer an inclusive rent, which makes it 
easier to budget as you won't suddenly be hit by a whopping great electricity 
bill just as the student loan is running dry.

Importantly, for most students it's the first time they've moved away from 
home, so it's nice to know that there's always security on hand or a friendly 
ear close by.
 