
Universities need to own up to the fact not all graduates will get jobs in 
their field of choice or risk adding to graduate oversupply, the head of the 
Group of Eight has warned.

Its chief executive, Vicki Thomson, made the remarks in a speech on Wednesday 
calling for greater transparency in admissions and a national admission body to 
replace five separate state-based systems.

At a conference on redefining admissions strategies in Sydney, Thomson warned 
that “less rigorous admission criteria” can enable students with low Atar 
scores “to consider university is necessarily for them”.

Too many graduates: universities chief warns against degrees for all
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/too-many-graduates-universities-chief-warns-against-degrees-for-all>
“There appears to be some cringe factor in stating openly that university may 
not be for everyone,” she said, reprisingcomments made earlier in August 
warning of pressure to attend uni resulting in an oversupply of graduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/too-many-graduates-universities-chief-warns-against-degrees-for-all>
.

Thomson warned that admission policies were complex because there was “a risk 
of admitting students who, even if they do complete, will have little chance of 
finding employment in their chosen career”.

“Should we be admitting them when we know at that time the graduate will be 
faced with that potential unfortunate outcome?”

Thomson said universities owed it to potential students to provide 
transparency regarding their career choice at the end of their study period.

She cited statistics demonstrating the difficulty of some career paths, 
including that in New South Wales 47,000 people were seeking teaching jobs, 
almost as many as the 48,000 who are now employed in the state’s public system.

Thomson warned that the system of uncapped university places may not be 
financially sustainable in the long term.

The demand-driven system was only introduced in 2012, so graduates had only 
just begun appearing in employment and salary surveys, she said. The comment 
suggests a deterioration in outcomes may occur when the full effects of the 
system wash through.

If the Go8 has a plea, it is don’t set students up to fail
Vicki Thomson, chief executive 
Thomson said the Group of Eight – a coalition of some of Australia’s oldest 
universities – was more focused on retention and completion of students than 
enrolment. She boasted they had an attrition rate of 7.1% for first-year 
students compared with the national rate of 14.8%.


“The Go8 is very concerned that half of all students with an Atar of 59 or 
below will not complete their degrees. That outcome represents a great cost to 
the student and the taxpayer; both of whom are left with a large financial debt 
for no result.”

She added that failing to complete a degree led to an “emotional cost” for 
students.

She called for support for students with low Atar scores to finish their 
degrees:“If the Go8 has a plea, it is don’t set students up to fail.”

The education minister Simon Birmingham has asked Western Sydney University 
chancellor, Peter Shergold, to lead a review of university admissions.

In a speech on Friday in Melbourne, Birmingham said students needed to be put 
“in the driving seat through greater transparency around admissions”.

“Greater transparency on student satisfaction and employment outcomes will 
also allow students to make more informed choices about their study options and 
career prospects,” he said.

Thomson called for a single national system for admission applications, to 
replace the five separate state-based systems which she said caused “various 
degrees of consumer orientation or disorientation”.

Australia's civic life will suffer if the major parties turn universities into 
factories | Robert Simms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/10/australias-civic-life-will-suffer-if-the-major-parties-turn-universities-into-factories>
A single system would open up choice for students and save the cost of 
multiple university applications, she said. “We will lobby hard for that to 
occur and to occur in the not-too-distant future.”

Thomson said greater transparency would counter a perception that the sector 
tossed around bonus points for special university entry “like confetti”. “Only 
total transparency can reassure potential students and their families that the 
system is just,” she said.

In response to earlier claims of graduate oversupply, the Macquarie University 
deputy vice-chancellor John Simons hasdescribed the idea universities could 
produce too many graduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/too-many-graduates-universities-chief-warns-against-degrees-for-all>
 as “frankly bizarre”.

He said degrees boost employment prospects and many people studying degrees 
such as law might not intend to become lawyers but undertook the degrees to 
improve their choices.
 