
A university today warned its students not to throw their mortarboards in the 
air at their graduation ceremonies because it was too dangerous and could hurt 
them.

Students have tossed the square cap with tassels into the sky to mark their 
graduation from university since 1912.

But Anglia Ruskin University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/angliaruskinuniversity>, in Cambridge, 
is trying to put an end to the tradition because it deems it a safety hazard.

It says several years ago a student needed stitches after he was hit on the 
head by a flying mortarboard on his graduation day.

A statement on the university's website reads: "It is requested that graduands 
[those about to graduate] do not throw the hat up into the air, as this not 
only causes damage to the hats, but can also cause injury if the corner of the 
hats hits the graduand or others nearby."

Steve Bennett, secretary and clerk at the university, said: "The university 
has not banned hat throwing at graduation ceremonies. However, we have advised 
students to be careful."

The university said that their supplier of graduation robes, Ede and 
Ravenscroft, supported the decision. But students and safety experts have 
mocked the university's advice as "health and safety gone mad".

Frankie Whiffen, 23, the university's student union president, said: "It's 
outrageous that decades of tradition should be shelved because big brother is 
worried a group of grown adults can't catch a hat properly. It's like banning 
graduation pictures outdoors in case an apple or conker falls on someone's head.

"Throwing your hat into the air is part of the student experience. Who is 
going to go round stopping it anyway - the hat police?"

Chay Champness, deputy chief executive of the British Safety Council, said 
sensible - not silly - precautions should be taken to protect people's safety.

He said: "It is sad that we are becoming a culture where the fear of 
litigation and overzealous interpretation of the rules is pushing people to be 
overly cautious.

"It is imperative that we encourage sensible and proportionate 
decision-making, not the needless outlawing of age-old traditions."

The university said if a student is hurt by a flying mortarboard it would be 
covered under its public liability insurance.
 