
University fundraisers should be feeling optimistic 

During the year 2013-14 universities saw a record level of new funds secured, 
growth in cash income received and in the numbers of donors, while fundraising 
costs per pound were at their lowest levels. Statistics collected as part of 
the annualRoss-CASE Survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/30/university-fundraisers-russell-group-uk>
 show that a higher proportion of institutions secured donations of over £10m. 
There was also a significant growth in the number of alumni in contact with 
their university and those donating to their alma mater.

Russell Group universities are the most successful fundraisers, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/30/university-fundraisers-russell-group-uk>
However, as in previous years, the picture is not universally positive. While 
the number of alumni involved in philanthropic giving continues to grow, it 
still remains stubbornly low at 2%. Of the 9.5 million contactable alumni, just 
over 183,000 made a donation in the period covered. Just six universities 
reported receiving donations from more than 5% of their alumni.

Size matters

There’s considerable variation in performance across the country. The research 
shows that six universities have lower philanthropic income than fundraising 
costs. These institutions had the lowest combined number of fundraising staff – 
which may explain their poorer performance.

Across the sector, a median of six full-time staff were employed in 
fundraising, as well as three staff on alumni relations. But some institutions 
have much larger departments: Oxford and Cambridge, who raise the most money, 
have a combined total of 366 fundraising staff.

The age of a fundraising department isn’t important

The age of fundraising programme is not, however, a clear indicator of high 
performance. More than half of the lower performing fundraising departments 
were set up before 2004. Yet, despite these extra years of experience, they 
appear to be struggling to create momentum. This suggests that a commitment to 
fundraising needs to be backed by clear strategic and investment plans to build 
scale effectively and to sustain fundraising effort over the long term.

Mission groups don’t determine fundraising success

 The ability to raise money isn’t dependent on mission group. Five of the 
fifteen universities that are considered established fundraisers – the best 
performing group other than Oxford and Cambridge – are not members of the 
Russell Group.

The economic environment is helping

This year’s survey has demonstrated that fundraising in UK higher education is 
in robust health. Perhaps the most positive news is the considerable and steady 
increase of the number of donors since 2011-12 (up 25% to 250,000). The return 
on investment is also promising: the median fundraising costs per pound 
received in participating institutions was 25p in 2013-14.

New funds secured by universities totalled £807m in 2013-14. While this is a 
tribute to the work of the 1,280 or so full and part-time fundraising staff 
working in higher education, the wider economic environment may have also 
helped. Universities received slightly more of their cash income from 
organisations than from individuals. Corporate donations fell as a proportion 
of gifts from companies – though an increased share came from trusts and 
foundations. This may be an indicator of changes in the mechanics of corporate 
philanthropy rather than the diminution of social responsibility programmes, 
it’s hard to tell.

What we can see is that there are links between investment and performance. 
There’s a correlation between the amount of new funds secured, cash income 
received and the mean number of staff dedicated to fundraising activities. 
Universities must invest if they want to see a growth in donations.

Join the higher education network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 