
This is a Cinderella story of sorts. A David and Goliath tale, or the 
phoenix's rise from the ashes. The story of how Aston University found itself 
quite extraordinarily high up in the university league tables, despite no one 
knowing much about it. A former technical college awarded full university 
status in 1966, Aston was the surprise debutante in the Top 20 of this year's 
Guardian university league tables (as well as those recently compiled by the 
Times). It appeared squished between those sturdily respectable institutions 
Durham and St Andrews, at the much coveted position of 13th. In a comparable 
study last year, it came 33rd.

Aston is a campus university situated right in the belly of Birmingham. You 
could look out of your student accommodation and spit on to the Bullring, 
should the mood take you. It shares the city with both the university of 
Central England and the better known Birmingham University, neither of which 
made it into the Top 20. "It's not a problem for us," says a Birmingham 
University spokeswoman calmly. "Good for them is, I suspect, how we feel. But 
all universities think the university tables are a bit of a game," she adds, 
darkly.

The secret of Aston's success might well be attributed to its highly 
specialised courses and moderately small student population of around 5,000 
undergraduates and 1,200 postgraduates - a recipe that also benefited the 
School of Oriental and African Studies and London School of Economics, which 
came fourth and fifth respectively in the league. Aston specialises in just 
four schools - business, life and health sciences (including pharmacy and 
biology, psychology and optometry); engineering and applied sciences (such as 
chemical and mechanical engineering); languages and social sciences. "The basic 
philosophy here is to focus," explains Professor Graham Hooley, pro-vice 
chancellor at Aston. "We're relatively small, which means we have to be good at 
what we do."

The benefits of Aston's diminutive size are the preoccupying factor for 
everyone I speak to. "We are small but perfectly formed," says James Seymour, 
the school liason officer. "Because we're so small there's a real culture of 
staff-student involvement," says public relations officer Sally Hoban.

Lauren McDougall, 20, a second-year business management student originally 
from Leicester, rattles off the mantra readily: "I'd been to see Manchester and 
I was quite intimidated by the size of it," she recalls. "But when I went to 
look round Aston I remember that there were a lot of people sitting round the 
lake and it seemed smaller and friendlier."

Even two years into her course, Aston still seems fun-sized. "Everything's on 
campus - halls, accommodation, lakes, grass, sports pitches, libraries. It only 
takes 15 minutes to walk round the university. That's the quirky thing about it 
- you see people you know all the time. It's very much a village in the city. 
The central student union is where you see everyone you know - it's cheap and 
it's safe and you don't need to get a taxi home."

Tutorials, she says, are made up of between 10 and 15 people: "All the 
lecturers have office hours when you can go and ask them things. They're very 
friendly. And the standard of facilities is really good: we have 24-hour 
computer access and lots of books. Maybe," McDougall concludes, with winning 
circularity, "there's lots of access because we're so small."

Each year there are 13,000 applicants for some 1,700 places and, as such, the 
average grades required for entry are a relatively high BBC (though its 
neighbours in the league table expect higher). Some 85-95% of those accepted 
hail from state school backgrounds. "Aston perhaps has been undervalued in the 
past. But we've made a concerted effort to get ourselves better noticed," says 
Hooley. And just how will they be getting themselves noticed? "Statistics is 
the main route."

That is perhaps the problem with Aston. For all the born-again zeal, the 
Stepford Wives-ish dedication to the fact that Aston is a hidden jewel, and the 
waxing lyrical about its size and facilities and sandwich courses, in other 
capacities Aston is unlikely to challenge the reign of the elite universities.

Despite its redesign, the university's central building remains a dour, 
imposing tower block in an uninspiring shade of dust - one of the tallest 
brick-built buildings in Europe, boasts the press office. Sky-lifts, added as a 
touch of modernity in the 1980s, run like seams up the side of the main 
structure. It's hardly the dreaming spires or the rugged beauty of St Andrews, 
and despite its 13th placing league table success, it seems unlikely to put it 
firmly on the university map. "It's not as well known as it should be," admits 
McDougall. "When I tell people I'm at Aston, a lot of them are still like, 
'Where's that then?'"
 