
The phrase "moral hazard" – the idea that a bank should be allowed to fail in 
order to encourage others to clean up their act – came into common parlance 
during the early days of the current financial crisis.

In the end, banks were bailed out – the result of which is beginning to affect 
the public purse and now higher education is facing a budget cut.

Despite the generous funding of recent years, many universities are running 
deficits. Given the pressure on public finances, is it time for the government 
to allow a university to face bankruptcy?

The question was asked by the free- market thinktank Policy Exchange last 
year, even before Lord Mandelson announced funding cuts to higher education. 
The thinktank concluded that the idea of the government stepping in to stop a 
university going to the wall had passed.

Its report, Sink or Swim: Facing Up to Failing Universities, argued that the 
urge to shore up financially struggling institutions through mergers meant 
there had been a failure to learn from past mistakes. Since 1997, there have 
been 27 mergers, many of which, it says, have been done to prop up struggling 
institutions. The "no-fail culture" should cease, said the thinktank.

According to Anna Fazackerley, one of the report's authors, the financial 
situation facing the sector now brings the competency of management and the 
role of the Higher Education Funding Council for England (Hefce) in dealing 
with failure into even sharper focus.

"The notion we've had in the sector that no institution should be allowed to 
fail is profoundly wrong. Given that this is taxpayers' money, the idea you 
will be cushioned no matter how badly you perform and no matter what you do, is 
wrong.

"I would imagine there will be one institution and probably more that will 
face the risk of bankruptcy."

Restructuring

When two institutions merge it can be a straightforward case of the 
financially stronger one absorbing the weaker one. Hefce provides management 
support and assistance where it is needed, for example in restructuring.

But the merger of the University of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofmanchester> Institute of 
Science and Technology and Manchester University, which had the backing of the 
prime minister, was helped with £80m from the government and regional 
development bodies.

Charles Clarke, a former education secretary, reveals that when he was in 
office he considered forcing universities to merge. "There are over 40 
institutions in London. I would say there was a case for mergers there, and in 
other parts of the country."

Fazackerley also questions the viability of the capital's 42 institutions. 
"There are a number of small specialist institutions and one question they will 
all be thinking about right now is whether or not it is sustainable for them to 
remain as they are."

The higher education minister, David Lammy, said in 2008 that he believed 
there were too many universities.

If the recent cuts weren't bad enough news, the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
(IFS) is predicting that there will be further cuts of £1.6bn. By 2013, the 
total reduction in the HE budget will be £2.5bn.

A recent report from accountancy firm PricewaterhouseCoopers shows that even 
in the boom years 2004-08, some 41 institutions – about a quarter of the total 
– operated with deficits.

Another insight into the financial health of parts of the sector is the figure 
for how many days HE institutions can survive on their reserves should all 
revenue cease – the so-called days ratio of total general funds to total 
expenditure.

The latest figures (2007-08) from the Higher Education Statistics Agency show 
that while the average English university could survive for 105.96 days on 
reserves, for Anglia Ruskin the figure was 12.57, for the University of Derby, 
13.58, and theUniversity of Greenwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofgreenwich>, 14.39.

One vice-chancellor says the recent budget cut is just the beginning of the 
woes facing the sector. The vice-chancellor, who did not wish to be named, 
predicted that universities could face problems stemming from funding cuts and 
a curtailed revenue stream from students. That would push some to the edge of 
bankruptcy.

"Would a government allow that to happen? I think the answer now is a lot 
different to what it was 10 years ago. I [don't] think that, with local 
government being savaged, there is going to be as much concern that a 
university will go bust, and at that point the issue of merger emerges."

The vice-chancellor questions whether, in future, guarantees about staffing 
levels and contracts could be made. "In the real world, when mergers take 
place, there is always a shedding of staff."

Chris Higgins, vice-chancellor of Durham University, recently said: "Some 
universities are not doing anything very well. They should be allowed to close 
because that's not a good use of public money."

Others believe there will have to be rationalisation. Philip Harding, chair of 
the British Universities Finance Directors' Group, says: "It will be as a 
result of the realisation that collaborating offers [universities] the best 
opportunity to operate and maintain quality. There will be fewer higher 
education institutions in five years' time, but I don't think it will be as a 
result of some going bust."

Paul Marshall, chief executive of the 1994 Group of smaller universities, 
says: "It's unlikely a university would go bankrupt. But if you look at the 
additional cuts predicted … those institutions that are borderline will find it 
very difficult."

In the coming years, he argues, these universities will be pushed towards a 
more focused delivery of what they are good at, which will include closing 
departments.

The idea that smaller institutions are the most vulnerable is disputed by 
Alice Hynes, chief executive of Guild HE, the umbrella group for these 
institutions. "Smaller specialist institutions are in some ways better suited 
to deal with the current situation than many of the larger, more generalist 
ones. I don't think we will come under any financial pressure to merge."

Hefce says it has a support programme to help institutions at risk and is 
making the sector aware of its powers."We don't believe we require additional 
powers to provide support," a spokesman says.
 