
Canada is a good place to learn about university fundraising because the 
giving culture is fairly similar to the UK, but its practice tends to be about 
20 years ahead. So it was that I recently found myself on the annualCASE 
fundraising study tour 
<http://www.case.org/Conferences_and_Training/Fundraising_Study_Tour_of_Canadian_Universities.html>
, which takes groups of academic leaders and fundraising professionals from 
Europe to Canadian universities to learn first hand how they approach this 
trickiest of businesses.

At McMaster University, <http://www.mcmaster.ca/> we learned about the 
motivations of fundraising's three main actors: development professionals, 
donors and academic leaders. Lorna Somers, vice president of McMaster 
University Foundation, told us about the transition from her early days at 
McMaster in the late 1980s, when academics treated her "like someone with 
advanced leprosy" and alumni would tell her that universities should look to 
the government for any money they wanted. Now academics are eager – sometimes 
too eager – to be involved. McMaster's annual fundraising target is $21m 
(£13.4m) and their last campaign raised $470m (£300m) in four years.

Donors have changed too, as we discovered when we met three of McMaster's most 
generous donors. All were alumni who had lost touch with the university and 
been attracted back, either to study or because they wanted to get involved in 
the running of the university. For each, giving was prompted by the realisation 
that they had the means to help the university do something exciting and 
extraordinary. This realisation is not the result of a fevered sales pitch but 
rather the culmination of a long relationship. Most of McMaster's top 20 donors 
started small, with less than $1000 (£640) and more than a decade elapsed 
between their first gift and their major gift.

McMaster was not the only place where we heard how important it is to manage, 
or steward, this relationship. Donors give because they want to make a 
difference. Once they have given, they need to be told what their gift has 
achieved. Then they may know that they can achieve more by giving again. 
Professionals who take the lead in donor stewardship involve academic leaders 
in generating and sustaining both the excitement that may result in a gift, and 
the satisfaction that the gift has been put to good use.

But not all academic leaders are good at this. We tend to get too hung up on 
the issue of asking for money. Some of us are terrified of the idea, others 
become too eager to askand become 'askaholics'.

John Kelton, dean of health sciences at McMaster, who has raised over $200m 
(£128m) in the last 10 years, told us about his relationships with major 
donors. Appropriately enough, our meeting took place in the 'floating' 
boardroom suspended in the atrium of the Michael G De Groote School of 
Medicine, a building funded by a donation of $105m (£672m), the largest single 
donation to a Canadian university.

Kelton's account of his work with donors made it clear that listening to 
donors and understanding what they are interested in, is as important as 
talking. Although our visits to three other universities confirmed everything 
we had learned at McMaster, in each of them we learned something distinctive 
and new. Max Blouw, president ofWilfrid Laurier University <https://www.wlu.ca/>
, told us how a successful campaign must be rooted in reality.

One of the first tasks he had set himself as president was to develop a story 
about the university based on the facts of the present rather than the myths of 
the past. As a result, Wilfrid Laurier's new mission statement, 'Inspiring 
lives of leadership and purpose', contains a strong component of business 
excellence that adds distinctiveness to its earlier bland image based on its 
origins as Waterloo Lutheran University.

Waterloo University, <http://uwaterloo.ca/> just next door to Wilfrid Laurier, 
tells a story of itself as producer of scientific and technological innovations 
that fuel a local high-technology economy. It encourages its staff, students 
and alumni to generate wealth, substantial chunks of which get fed back as 
donations. Waterloo alumnus and inventor of the BlackBerry, Mike Lazaridis, has 
given hundreds of millions to support research to develop technologies of the 
future in nanoscience and quantum computing. A Waterloo student donated the 
million dollars profit he made from selling his first business.

Despite these successes, only a small fraction of the alumni who could make 
substantial donations are disconnected from the university. Jason Coolman, 
director of alumni affairs, told us about his research on using 'elite' alumni 
to engage these disconnected former students and gradually get them on board.

On our last day at University of Toronto Mississauga (UTM) 
<http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/>, Gillian Morrison from the university's central 
campaigns office talked us through the stages of developing UTM's extraordinary 
$2bn'Boundless' campaign. The biggest in Canadian university history, this 
campaign is directly linked with academic mission, and shows that smaller 
universities can have no excuse for lack of coherence in their campaigns.

So could the UK emulate what the Canadians have achieved? The more I think 
about it, the more I think we could. And if we learn from their mistakes rather 
than repeating them, we could do it faster. An average sized, middle-ranking 
British university should be able to get to a point where they are raising 
£5-£10m per year from philanthropy within five to 10 years.

Andrew Derrington is executive pro vice-chancellor of humanities and social 
sciences at the University of Liverpool – he blogs aboutuniversity management 
<http://rummidge.org/> and grant writing 
<http://www.researchfundingtoolkit.org/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 