
Thousands of people streamed off the University of Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> campus on Friday, after a phoned-in 
bomb threat prompted an evacuation of all buildings and officials warned 
students and faculty to "get as far away as possible". By mid-morning, no bombs 
had been found.

The university received a call about 8.35am from a man claiming to be with 
al-Qaida, who said he had placed bombs all over the 50,000-studentAustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> campus, according to University of 
Texas spokeswoman Rhonda Weldon. He claimed the bombs would go off in 90 
minutes and all buildings were evacuated at 9.50am as a precaution, Weldon said.

North Dakota State University in Fargo, ND, also ordered a campus evacuation 
after a morning bomb threat, but it was unclear whether the two threats were 
related. NDSU issued a statement shortly before 10 am telling all employees and 
students to leave 14,000-student campus within a half-hour.

In Texas, police blocked off roads heading in to the UT campus as lines of 
cars sat in gridlock, trying to get out. As a text-message alert went out, 
sirens blared for between five and 10 minutes. Students said they were directed 
off campus by university staff.

"One of them said to me, 'Get off this campus as soon as possible,'" said 
Elizabeth Gerberich, an 18-year-old freshman from New Jersey.

The university issued another advisory by 10.30 am, saying buildings still 
were being checked and no decision had been made about whether the campus would 
reopen for afternoon classes.

Ashley Moran, a freshman from Houston, said she was waiting to get into class 
when word began spreading among students to leave immediately. She described 
the evacuation as "orderly but tense".

"It makes me really nervous," she said. "I just know we're supposed to get 
out."

With rain falling, students stood under awnings and overhangs or went inside 
stores and coffee shops to wait out the alert. Students said that despite the 
uncertainty, the atmosphere was mostly calm.
 