
My eye invariably veers from the road, and my route on my bicycle is diverted, 
when a tree in full flower crosses my path. I will pull into a lay-by and make 
my way back against oncoming traffic, or loiter on the pavement under the 
branches, for few things compare with the sky being eclipsed by flowers. We are 
spoiled, while the framework is still bare, with almond, peach, pear and plum. 
Then there are a myriad cherries, followed by apple, which comes with the first 
of the summer foliage. This signifies the end of the blossom season, but my 
appetite remains keen, even though the garden is now wearing its summer clothes.

The first part of the summer season sees most trees putting on growth, not 
energy into flower, with limbs extending in a fortnight of fury before they 
hunker down to produce mast or acorn, keys, pods or berries and the native 
countryside musters to green. But closer in, if you want a tree that flowers 
for you in the summer months you have to look further afield, to continents 
that have hotter summers. A plant such as Genista aetnensis erupts into flower 
in late spring on the lava-strewn slopes of Mount Etna, with curious leafless 
branches festooned with golden pea flowers. I have never seen this plant in the 
wild, but here in the cooler, damper climate of the UK, the Mount Etna broom 
blooms only once the weather has really warmed. For us, that means at 
midsummer, for a fortnight or more from mid-June. I can see it gathering 
strength as I write, its wiry branches weighted down with tiny buds. The trees 
at the front of my house are now alive with bees and honey-scented. It is a 
spectacle that rivals the blossom of spring and the one with which I mark high 
summer.

Until last year, I had a small group of Catalpa x erubescens 'Purpurea' in the 
back garden to follow on in the height of July. But as they succumbed 
repeatedly to verticillium wilt I replaced them with Cornus kousa. I had long 
been meaning to live with a Korean dogwood, but I knew it had to be a tree that 
bloomed in the summer, because I wanted to balance the weight and verdancy of 
the hornbeam, and I wanted something that had grace and change built in with 
its seasonality.

The earlier flowering C florida come with the first flush of summer, at about 
the same time as the crab apples. They are notoriously fickle in this country, 
which is why I prefer the much more reliable C kousa, the plant that is often 
used for rootstock. I have 'Chinensis', as this is reliably free flowering, and 
in other gardens I have used 'China Girl', as it is a little more upright and 
floriferous to the point of eclipsing the foliage when in bloom.

Bloom is not exactly the right term for the flowering dogwoods, as the 
conspicuous part of the 'flower' is, in fact, four beautifully shaped bracts, 
each like an ancient arrow-head. The real flower is a tiny ball of 
inconspicuousness in the centre. In most dogwoods the bracts start life small 
and green, much like the foliage from which they emerge. They expand to cream, 
which is when they are at their purest, and weight the branches, which span out 
wide and horizontally. As they age, after about a month, they fade to pink. 
Some forms, such as 'Satomi', a raspberry pink variety I am using in Tokyo, 
have been selected for their curious colouring, but I prefer the 
cream-flowering dogwoods, as they have a purity that suits a tree that can 
ultimately reach as high as 30ft tall and as much across. When that happens I 
will underplant my tree with Japanese wind anemones for the autumn. The berries 
of the cornus at that point hang in the branches like strawberries.

C 'Norman Hadden' is a cross that originated in Knightshayes Court in Devon 
and is thought to contain something of C capitata. I am investing in several in 
various gardens around the country, for what makes it distinctive, if you have 
the sheltered position it prefers, is its ability to keep most of its foliage 
in the winter. This is a lovely asset, particularly when hung with the 
strawberry-like fruits late in the year, and there are few small trees that 
keep their leaves without being 'heavy'. Where many flowering dogwoods prefer 
and look best in the woodland margins, 'Norman Hadden' likes the sun to ripen 
the summer wood. Wind, alkaline soil, drought and waterlogging are to be 
avoided, though you could say that of many things, so don't take fright at 
their general requirements.

The smallest of the flowering dogwoods, and one that I couldn't fail to 
mention, is C canadensis. This is a creeping groundcover plant that hails from 
North America, where it carpets the acid forest floor along with mosses and 
blueberries. I have never had any luck keeping it, but I have friends who have 
it growing quite happily in dry shade in Kent, planted under Hydrangea 
quercifolia, another North American, where it makes the ground beneath sparkle 
when in flower. If I do well with its Korean cousin, it will be on my list of 
things to add to my summer distractions.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>

Observer offer Readers can buy a Cornus kousa 'Chinensis' for just £9.95, or 
three for £24.85 inc. p&p - saving £5. Call 0870 836 0909, quoting ref OBDP083, 
or send a cheque made payable to Observer Reader Offers with your order to 
Observer Cornus Kousa, OBDP083, Rookery Farm, Joys Bank, Holbeach St Johns, 
Spalding, PE12 8SG. Price includes UK mainland p&p. Delivery within 28 days, 
plants supplied in 9cm pots

· For regular updates on our allotment's progress, pictures and slideshows, 
and to share your gardening comments, questions, recipes and advice, visit
blogs.theguardian.com/allotment <http://blogs.theguardian.com/allotment>
 