
Fighter jets from the US led coalition have destroyed a moving Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) convoy near Mosul in northern 
Iraq. Iraqi officials said a number of top militants had been killed.

A US defence official was however unable to confirm reports that the group’s 
top commander,Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi>, was among the 50 
casualties in the ten vehicles targeted or even whether he was present.


Baghdadi made a rare public appearance at a mosque in Mosul in July. 
Colonel Patrick Ryder, a spokesman at US Central Command, said “I can confirm 
that coalition aircraft did conduct a series of air strikes yesterday evening 
[Friday] in Iraq against what was assessed to be a gathering of Isil [Isis] 
leaders nearMosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>. We cannot confirm 
if Isil leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was among those present.”


Ryder added that convoy consisted of 10 Isis armed trucks which were were 
destroyed in the air strikes, which “demonstrates the pressure we continue to 
place on the IS terrorist network”.


A Mosul morgue official said 50 bodies of Isis militants were brought in after 
the air strike.

Earlier, the al-Hadath TV station, which is part of Saudi-owned al-Arabiya 
television, reported that US-led strikes had targeted a gathering of Isis 
leaders inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, possibly including 
al-Baghdadi.

Two witnesses told Reuters an air strike had targeted a house where senior 
Isis officers were meeting, near the western Iraqi border town of al-Qaim, and 
said Isis fighters had cleared a hospital so that their wounded could be 
treated, using loudspeakers to urge residents to donate blood.

Residents said there were unconfirmed reports that Isis’s local leader in the 
western Iraqi province of Anbar and his deputy were killed.


Earlier, a US official said fighters had targeted the convoy near the northern 
city of Mosul, about 170 miles from al-Qaim, and against small Isis units 
elsewhere, but added that US-led strikes had not targeted an Isis gathering.

Isis did not immediately issue any statement on the strikes. 

In Iraq on Friday, a suicide truck bomber targeting a senior police officer’s 
convoy killed eight people, including the ranking official, authorities said.

The attack happened late on Friday, when the attacker drove his bomb-laden 
truck into the convoy of police lieutenant general Faisal Malik, who was 
inspecting troops in the town of Beiji, police said. The blast killed Faisal 
and seven police officers, while wounding 15 people, hospital officials and 
police officers said. No one immediately claimed the attack.

Beiji is home to Iraq’s largest oil refinery, and lies 155 miles north of 
Baghdad.

On Saturday, a series of bombings in and around the capital killed at least 19 
people. The deadliest attack took place on a commercial street in Baghdad’s 
south-western Amil neighborhood, where two car bombs killed eight people and 
wounded 16, police officials said.


In the south-eastern neighborhood of al-Amin, at least nine people were killed 
and another 18 wounded when a car bomb tore through a commercial street lined 
with restaurants. In Yousifiya, a town just south of the capital, two people 
were killed and four wounded in a bombing near a fruit and vegetable market.

Hospital officials confirmed the casualties. All police and hospital officials 
spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorised to speak to 
journalists.

The US, Iraq and other western and Arab countries have formed a coalition 
against the militant group.


The Pentagon announced on Friday that 1,500 additional US troops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/07/obama-doubles-us-troop-levels-iraq-isis>
 will boost the 1,600 military advisers that are already in Iraq to assist the 
country’s army.


President Obama also plans to request $5.6bn (£3.5bn) from Congress, including 
$1.6bn to be used to train and arm Iraqi forces.

A US-led coalition has been launching air strikes on Isis militants and 
facilities in Iraq and Syria for months, as part of an effort to give Iraqi 
forces the time and space to mount a more effective offensive.
 