
The US is convinced that Ahmed Wali Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, the president's younger 
half-brother and a senior figure in Kandahar, is corrupt, according to embassy 
cables released by WikiLeaks.

His immense power in Afghanistan's second city is well illustrated in a cable 
from June 2009 from the US embassy in Kabul that analyses the city's politics 
and describes the Karzai family's position as a "semi-modern aristocracy".

Under the heading "Kandahar politics complicate US objectives in Afghanistan", 
it says: "As the kingpin of Kandahar,Ahmed Wali Karzai (AWK) dominates access 
to economic resources, patronage, and protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/238320>. Much of 
the real business of running Kandahar takes place out of public sight, where 
AWK operates, parallel to formal government structures, through a network of 
political clans that use state institutions to protect and enable licit and 
illicit enterprises."

AWK is described as the city's "unrivaled strongman" who rules over political 
deal- and decision-making at the provincial level. According to the cable, the 
"overriding purpose that unifies his political roles as chairman of the 
Kandahar provincial council and as the president's personal representative to 
the south is the enrichment, extension and perpetuation of the Karzai clan, and 
along with it their branch of the Popalzai tribe. This applies equally to his 
entrepreneurial and his alleged criminal activities. AWK derives authority and 
legitimacy from his relationship to President Karzai, from the relative 
discipline and elite position of the Popalzai tribe and from his access to 
resources."

Karzai family-run businesses include the alleged control of trucking on 
Highway 1, Afghanistan's national ring road, through Kandahar province and 
beyond, as well as private security contracting and real estate, the cable 
says. It mentions Ayno Mina, which is described as an ostentatious Karzai 
property development for Afghan elites east of Kandahar City, built on land 
obtained from the government at rock bottom prices, with financing guaranteed 
by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a US government agency that 
sells investment services to assist US companies.

The cable says that AWK is unlike other Afghan strongmen who have public 
support because they fund useful projects and deliver services. By contrast, 
"AWK is widely unpopular in Kandahar, because he rules exclusively rather than 
inclusively; he is not perceived as caring about the population at large but 
rather, as a traditional Pashtun Khan using his power to 'feed his tribe'."

One of the most lucrative projects in the region is Canada's rehabilitation of 
the Dahla dam and irrigation works which were originally constructed by the US 
in the 1950s. Land values are expected to increase dramatically in the 
Arghandab river valley which the dam serves.

The cable says: "Karzai businesses are also set to acquire multiple patronage 
benefits from Dahla dam construction and security contracts, but the main prize 
will be political control over long-term allocation of water flows … It is no 
accident that AWK lobbied the project's Canadian sponsors on behalf of the 
Watan Group, the eventual winner of the Dahla dam security contract, whose CEO 
is his cousin, US national Rashid Popal."

More than business is involved; Karzai tribal allies will control security. "A 
follow-on to warlord militias, private security companies today also serve 
personal interests as camouflaged vehicles for protection rackets in 
construction, transportation and drug smuggling," it adds.

The cable suggests the Karzais may be trying to create a private regional army 
to protect themselves from rivals. It points out that AWK has been trying to 
get the interior ministry to authorise him to license all contractors and their 
weapons through the Kandahar provincial council. This "has the potential to arm 
the Karzai clan with a non-state entity that can insure against whoever should 
come to power in Afghanistan".

The cable highlights the difficulties the US faces in tackling the Karzai 
family. "Initiatives that rely on the Afghan government to take the lead in 
bringing to justice major corrupt figures or negative influences in Kandahar 
contain a serious dilemma: they would include some of Karzai's closest 
relatives and allies and require the prosecution of people on whom we often 
rely for assistance and/or support. Second, any efforts to bring these 
individuals to justice could compromise the informal governing networks to 
which Kandaharis have become accustomed, without necessarily replacing them 
with effective government officials or improving the delivery of services."

In February the US finally began to consider steps to deal with AWK. According 
to the cables, a US committee known as the Nexus-Corruption Leadership Board, 
co-chaired by a US diplomat in the Kabul embassy and a US intelligence general, 
met on 4 February to discusswhat measures to take "against criminal and corrupt 
Afghan officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/248828> in an 
effort to change their behaviour … and end tacit American support for corrupt 
Afghan officials".

The aim was to show that the US was going "to change its policy on 
corruption", having been criticised for turning a blind eye to allegations that 
senior Afghan officials are involved in drug-dealing and money-laundering. The 
cable said the board would recommend various measures "including possible law 
enforcement actions against three prominent malign actors in southernAfghanistan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, Abdul Razziq, Ahmed Wali 
Karzai, Asadullah Sherzad".

Apart from prosecutions, the board would consider shunning corrupt officials, 
denying them photo opportunities with senior US officials, including visiting 
members of Congress, refusing any exchanges of gifts, and blocking them from 
US-funded travel, training and speaking engagements.

So far, no prosecution of AWK has taken place. He consistently rejects all 
allegations as politically motivated charges from rivals. In a conversation 
with Frank Ruggiero, the top US civilian official in southern Afghanistan, AWK 
dismissed allegations that he was involved in drug-smuggling as"like a spice 
added to a dish to make it more enticing to eat" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/250607>, 
according to another cable. He told the official he was ready to take a lie 
detector test to prove his innocence.

In spite of these assurances, the cable ends with the US official commenting 
on AWK: "While he presented himself as a partner to the United States and is 
eager to be seen as helping the coalition, he also demonstrated that he will 
dissemble when it suits his needs. He appears not to understand the level of 
our knowledge of his activities, and that the coalition views many of his 
activities as malign, particularly relating to his influence over the police. 
We will need to monitor his activity closely".
 