
It is a world of encrypted laptops, unmarked mail and the briefest stops in 
multiple hotels. Accusations by US prosecutors this week shed a fascinating 
light on the allegedly cloak-and-dagger world ofUBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ubs>, Switzerland's biggest bank.

A grand jury in Florida has charged one of UBS's top executives, Raoul Weil, 
with helping 17,000 Americans to avoid tax by safeguarding their money in 
secret Swiss bank accounts.

Weil, who is based in Zurich, is the head of UBS's wealth management division, 
and his prosecution is likely to cause deep alarm at the highest levels of 
Switzerland's banking establishment.

"There's enough in this indictment, if you read between the lines, to suggest 
that UBS has a serious problem here," says Bradley Simon, a former federal 
prosecutor at law firm Simon & Partners.

"They're making some really serious allegations that go to the heart of UBS."

The US department of justice has been gunning for UBS for many months. It 
alleges that the bank aggressively pushed its services to US citizens through 
none-too-subtle nudges about tax-avoidance benefits.

Between 2002 and 2007, some 20,000 American clients had private accounts at 
UBS with a hefty $20bn in total assets.

Florida's federal prosecutor, Alexander Acosta, who is leading the charge 
against UBS, says 17,000 of these clients concealed their accounts from the 
Internal Revenue Service.

Secret off-shore bank accounts are nothing new. But what appears to have 
enraged the US authorities are UBS's tactics.

According to the indictment, UBS at one stage had customers signing a form 
which said: "I would like to avoid disclosure of my identity to the US IRS."

Letters to clients assured them that since 1939, the bank had been successful 
in concealing the identity of account holders from the US authorities. There 
was even a training course for staff in September 2006 on how to conduct 
business discreetly – by using mail without UBS insignia, by using encrypted 
computers and "by changing hotels while travelling".

It all sounds a bit James Bond – and it gets worse. A former UBS staffer, 
Bradley Birkenfeld, who is cooperating with the authorities, claims he once 
used a toothpaste tube to smuggle diamonds across an international border for a 
bank client.

The charges against Weil carry a potential sentence of five years in prison 
and a $250,000 fine, so the 49-year-old is unlikely to be keen to hop on a 
transatlantic flight from Zurich. But if the bank ignores the indictment, UBS 
could face severe consequences – perhaps an indictment against the institution 
or a threat to its US banking licence.

"The justice department will be putting enormous pressure on UBS and possibly 
threatening an indictment against the bank," says Simon, who believes such a 
move could be shattering for the reputation of a large financial institution.

"Remember Arthur Andersen? When they were indicted, it spelt the end for them."

Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> rarely allows its 
citizens to be extradited to face charges abroad – and its national laws 
require banks to respect clients' privacy strictly. But there is a loophole: if 
there is evidence of criminal activity, Swiss banks can provide information to 
cooperate with law enforcement authorities.

UBS provided a bland statement saying Weil was relinquishing his duties until 
the matter was resolved. It added: "UBS is fully committed to continuing its 
efforts to cooperate with the investigation of its US cross-border business in 
a responsible manner with all relevant authorities towards a satisfactory 
resolution of this matter."

The drama is the last thing UBS needs. In common with rival banks across Europe
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the US, it has been 
scorched by the global financial crisis, writing off more than $40bn of losses 
on toxic assets. Its longstanding chairman, Marcel Ospel, quit in April, 
admitting to "mistakes" amid shareholder unrest.

America's assault on Switzerland's banking secrecy is causing ructions in 
Zurich. A report in one paper, the Tages-Anzeiger, this week accused the US 
treasury of covertly tracking transactions between 100 Swiss institutions 
through international computer systems used for transaction clearance. The 
paper named a system called Remotegate and claimed that the Americans were 
using tools designed to tackle international terrorism.

The Swiss government is being tight-lipped. A spokesman at Switzerland's 
embassy in Washington would only say: "The embassy was informed by the 
department of justice of the charges brought against Mr Weil."

The US authorities want the names of UBS's 17,000 wealthy American clients. If 
it hands them over, the Swiss bank will set a highly significant precedent not 
only for its rivals in Switzerland but for banks in tax havens around the world 
which operate in the US.

If all 17,000 customers are forced to stump up tax, it could be a decent 
earner for the US treasury. Perhaps the money could even end up back in the 
banking system, helping to fund Henry Paulson's $700bn bail-out of America's 
own teetering financial institutions.
 