
US regulators have approved new broadband privacy rules that make internet 
providers such asComcast <https://www.theguardian.com/media/comcast> and 
Verizon ask their customers’ permission before using or sharing much of their 
data.

The move is designed to give citizens more control of their own data, but 
internet companies claim it will make it more difficult for them to grow their 
advertising businesses.

 Under the measure, a broadband provider has to ask a customer’s permission 
before it can share a customer’s browsing history, the apps she has used or her 
mobile phone’s location with an advertiser.

 Other information is not considered as private, such as names and addresses, 
and customers should assume that broadband providers can use that information 
while offering an “opt-out”.
 The Federal Communications Commission’s measure was scaled back from an 
earlier proposal, but was still criticized by the advertising, 
telecommunications and cable industries.

 Cable and phone companies want to increase revenue from ad businesses of 
their own. AT&T has said increasing advertising tailored to customers’ 
preferences is one of the goals of its $85.4bn purchase of Time Warner, which 
owns HBO, CNN and TBS, while Verizon has bought AOL and recently agreed to buy 
Yahoo in order to build up a digital-ad business.

 But the new rules could make doing that more difficult. Companies and 
industry groups say it’s confusing and unfair that the regulations are stricter 
than the Federal Trade Commission standards that digital-advertising behemoths 
such as Google and Facebook operate under. The FCC does not regulate such web 
companies.
 FCC officials approved the rules on a 3-2 vote on Thursday, its latest 
contentious measure to pass on party lines.

 “It is the consumer’s information. How it is to be used should be the 
consumer’s choice, not the choice of some corporate algorithm,” said Tom 
Wheeler, the Democratic chairman of the FCC who has pushed for the privacy 
measure and other efforts that have angered phone and cable companies.

AT&T and others fought the “net neutrality” rules that went into effect in 
2015, meaning say ISPs can’t prioritize some internet-based services over 
others. Another measure that could make the cable-box market more competitive 
is still waiting for an FCC vote.

 One of the Republican commissioners who voted against the privacy rules, 
Michael O’Reilly, said that they were senseless because broadband providers 
could still buy the information they would have collected, and that the prices 
consumers ultimately pay could rise.

 Industry groups representing the cable, phone and advertising industries 
criticized the outcome of Thursday’s vote, while several consumer-advocacy 
groups hailed it.
 