
The American Legislative Exchange Council, a secretive alliance of big 
businesses and largely Republican state legislators who co-operate to push a 
right-wing political agenda in the American hinterland, is continuing to wield 
outsized influence over gun laws across the US despite its promise in the wake 
of theTrayvon Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> 
furore to stop operating in this area.

As protesters gathered outside Alec's 40th annual gathering of lawmakers and 
corporate interests in Chicago, anew watchdog report 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/749533-alec-report-2013.html> finds 
that stand-your-ground laws of the sort forwarded by the group and made 
infamous by the Martin killing are still proliferating around the country. Last 
year, Alec came under intense criticism that its model stand-your-ground law,
first adopted in Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/18/alec-lobby-politics-florida> 
in 2005 having been drafted by the National Rifle Association, had prevented 
the arrest of George Zimmerman, Martin's shooter, and made his prosecution more 
difficult.

In the wake of the controversy, the group disbanded 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/167425/alec-disbands-task-force-responsible-voter-id-stand-your-ground-laws#axzz2bOQrsHZx>
 its "public safety and elections" taskforce that had been lobbying for 
stand-your-ground laws and for the spread of voter ID laws that restrict voter 
registration and make it harder for black, elderly and poor voters to cast 
their ballots. But the new report from the Center for Media and Democracy finds 
that the group's hand can still be felt across the US with the ongoing creep of 
stand-your-ground and regressive electoral laws.

The report chronicles how no fewer than 62 stand-your-ground and voter ID laws 
have been introduced so far this year based to some degree on model bills 
framed by Alec. That includes 10 stand-your-ground bills, passed in two states 
and 52 legislative moves to restrict voter access adopted by five states.
 A protester is pinned to the ground and arrested during a rally in downtown 
Chicago outside the Palmer House Hilton Hotel where Alec were meeting 
Photograph: James Fassinger/For the Guardian 
"Florida's 'shoot-first' law – an Alec model bill – shielded George Zimmerman 
from arrest for six weeks and ensured law enforcement failed to conduct a 
proper investigation," said Rashad Robinson of ColorOfChange in a press 
conference to launch the new report. "Alec now says they don't work on 
shoot-first laws or voter ID laws, but these laws continue to exist around the 
country, putting black folks in harm's way, and Alec are doing nothing to clean 
up the mess."

The annual gathering in Chicago of Alec members – both state-level politicians 
and business executives – is the 40th such meeting. Founded in 1973, the group 
remained largely under the radar until two years ago when a whistleblower 
disclosed 800 of its model bills.

Chris Taylor, a state representative in Wisconsin, has been attending the 
Chicago gathering having paid the $575 registration fee out of her own pocket. 
She said there remained a "shroud of secrecy" around the event, with very 
little media present and few details put out about the schedule before it 
started on Wednesday.

Taylor said that neither gun nor electoral laws had been on the formal agenda 
so far, but the NRA was well represented on the exhibition floor as were groups 
touting restrictive voting legislation. "Legislators are treated like the foot 
soldiers of special interests and are instructed to go out and enact their 
marching orders," Taylor said.

The Center for Media and Democracy report identifies a total of 466 Alec bills 
that have been introduced by state legislatures so far this year, spanning all 
50 states as well as the District of Columbia. Much of the effort has gone into 
bills rolling back workers' rights including controversial "right to work" 
legislation introduced in 15 states and other attempts to block minimum wage 
structures.

Bills impacting state education have also been high on the agenda, with 139 
Alec bills introduced and 31 enacted this year. The legislation focused on 
redirecting taxpayer money from public schools to for-profit private schools.

Legislation making it easier for energy companies to forward polluting 
activities such as fossil fuel consumption and fracking were identified in 77 
Alec bills so far this year.
 