
The upside of being good enough to qualify for the US Open is the opportunity 
to play on a grand stage against the best players in the world. For British 
debutantJohanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta>, born 
in Sydney to Hungarian parents before taking up British citizenship in May, 
that chance turned into the best day of her career when she beat the exciting 
young Timea Babos (a bona fide Hungarian) 6-4, 7-5 on Tuesday.

Konta, ranked 203 in the world, converted the third of three match points to 
wind it up on Court 15, watched by a few diehards and friends, in 107 minutes, 
and joins Laura Robson in the second round. Babos, 19 and rising through the 
ranks at 59, has hit the fastest serve on the women's tour this year, 120mph, 
so Konta did well to tame it in a close and enthralling match.

The downside to exposure to tennis at this level, meanwhile — as Anne 
Keothavong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong> has discovered 
on three visits to Flushing Meadows — is that it is an experience forged in 
fire, and the Londoner's tormentor this time, the sixth seed Angelique Kerber, 
was merciless in executing a first-round win in just 54 minutes. Keothavong, 
ranked 81 in the world, won her two games in the first set. The second went in 
a blur.

Keothavong fought hard, taking Kerber to deuce in the first game and saving a 
match point in the last before succumbing to the inevitable, along the way 
chasing down the barrage of heavy artillery that peppered her lines, wide and 
deep. But her chances against an opponent four years younger and physically in 
a different suburb were some way slimmer than Kerber's rock-like legs, the 
ballast that drives her heavy ground strokes.Like Heather Watson against Li Na 
on the first day, Keothavong could not sustain the quality of her shot-making 
under sustained pressure. On balance and recent evidence, Watson, at 20 and 
owner of a stronger all-round game, has a much better chance of breaking 
through.

Robson won in style on day one, in straight sets against the American 
qualifier Samantha Crawford, and can celebrate with an appearance on Arthur 
Ashe, against Kim Clijsters this afternoon, ahead of Andy Murray's appearance 
in the last match of the evening.
 