
The billionaire financier Sir Allen ­Stanford was remanded to a US jail 
tonight after facing 21 criminal charges of fiddling investors out of $7bn 
(£4.2bn) to fund a "personal playground" stretching from international cricket 
tournaments to ­Caribbean villas.

After surrendering to the FBI at his girlfriend's house in Virginia, Stanford 
made a brief appearance before a judge who ordered the 59-year-old to remain in 
federal custody pending his transfer to his home state of Texas.

A six-month investigation culminated in the US department of justice accusing 
Stanford and six conspirators of defrauding 30,000 clients in 131 countries of 
their savings by operating a vast pyramid scheme masquerading as a legitimate 
Antigua-registered bank.

Stanford International Bank (SIB) allegedly lied to customers about its 
financial condition, offered "too good to be true" interest rates and bribed a 
former financial regulator in the Caribbean with $100,000 in cash, use of a 
corporate car, trips on private jets and tickets to the SuperBowl.

"The department of justice will vigorously root out and expose financial 
crimes that wreak havoc on innocent investors," assistant attorney general 
Lanny Breuer told a press conference in Washington. "Investors need access to 
accurate and truthful financial information in order to make decisions about 
how to invest their hard-earned savings."

Stanford is personally accused of looting $1.6bn in undisclosed loans from the 
bank. Court papers filed by the securities and exchange commission say this 
"theft" disguised by promissory notes, included $36m used to subsidise the 
Caribbean's Stanford 20/20 cricket tournament which boasted a $20m prize fund, 
plus property ventures including an Antigua restaurant, the Sticky Wicket.

SIB is accused of maintaining two separate sets of accounts. Back-up files 
were kept on a portable hard-drive known as "the football" and to cover its 
tracks, the SEC says the bank used Stanford's ­personal jet to fly paper files 
from the US to Antigua, where they were burned.

The charges against Stanford, 59, include fraud, conspiracy to launder money 
and conspiracy to obstruct justice. Also in the dock are Stanford's chief 
investment officer Laura Pendergest-Holt, chief accounting officer Gilberto 
Lopez, global controller Mark Kuhrt and Leroy King, a former head of Antigua's 
financial services regulatory commission.

A former Stanford global security specialist, Bruce Perraud, faces a lesser 
count of shredding records. Stanford's chief financial officer and former 
university room-mate, James Davis, is also accused of fraud but is receiving 
lenient treatment because he has become a key informant against his 
longstanding boss.

A flamboyant character, Stanford was born in Texas but was knighted in 
­Antigua and has hobnobbed with leading England cricketers as one of the 
sport's leading benefactors.

He has protested his innocence of wrongdoing in a series of emotional 
interviews since his Houston offices were raided by regulators in February and 
accused the US government of using "Gestapo tactics" and of trying to nail him 
like a "moose head" to the wall. He maintains that as far as he was aware, his 
empire was legitimate and that any wrongdoing was the fault of his underlings.

Driven to a courthouse by US marshals thismorning, the financier sat slumped 
backwards in the rear of a black car, dressed in a white shirt but keeping his 
face out of sight of photographers. His lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, issued a 
statement saying Stanford was "confident that a fair jury will find him not 
guilty of any criminal wrongdoing". Once Stanford is in Texas, legal experts 
say the US government is likely to press for him to be held in detention on the 
grounds that he could flee to his homes in Antigua or St Croix, in the US 
Virgin Islands. But in the hope of securing bail, the former billionaire has 
emphasised his willingness to co-operate with the legal system.

Jacob Frenkel, a former US prosecutor, specialising in white-collar crimes, 
said Stanford stood a good chance of bail, albeit with travel restrictions. 
"The reason Mr Stanford has chosen to remain in the US and allow his 
whereabouts to remain known is to improve significantly his chances of getting 
bail," said Frenkel.

But he added that the government, mindful of criticism over its slowness to 
catch notorious fraudsters such as Bernard Madoff, was likely to come down 
heavily on Stanford: "Any time you have allegations of massive fraud underlying 
losses of such enormous magnitude that have reduced affluent people to near 
indigence, the outrage and clamouring for accountability is at a predictable 
premium."
 