
For the first time, a US patient has been infected with bacteria resistant to 
an antibiotic used as a last resort, scientists said Thursday.


The patient, a 49-year-old woman in Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania>, has recovered but health 
officials fear that if the resistance spreads to other bacteria, the country 
may soon see supergerms impervious to all known antibiotics.

“It is the end of the road for antibiotics unless we act urgently,” Dr Tom 
Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), said 
in Washington.

Other countries have already seen multidrug-resistant superbugs that no 
antibiotic can fight. So far, the US has not. But this sets the stage for that 
development, CDC officials said.

England’s chief medical officer warns of ‘antibiotic apocalypse’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
The woman had gone to a military clinic in Pennsylvania in April and was 
treated for a urinary tract infection. Initial tests found she was infected 
with E coli bacteria, a common variety of germ seen in the gut that often makes 
its way to the bladder.

But the tests showed this E coli was resistant to antibiotics commonly used 
first for such infections. She was successfully treated with another kind of 
antibiotic.

But while she has recovered, further testing completed in the last week 
confirmed the E coli was carrying a gene for resistance against the drug 
colistin.

Colistin is an old antibiotic. By the 1970s, doctors had mostly stopped using 
it because of its harsh side effects. But it was brought back as other 
antibiotics began losing their effectiveness.

Doctors in US incorrectly prescribe antibiotics in nearly a third of cases
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/03/us-doctors-antibiotic-prescriptions-study>
It is used against hard-to-treat bacteria that resist one of the last lines of 
defence, antibiotics called carbapenems. If those germs pick up the 
colistin-resistance gene, doctors may be out of treatment options, health 
officials say.

“This is another piece of a really nasty puzzle that we didn’t want to see 
here,” said Dr Beth Bell, who oversees CDC’s emerging infectious diseases 
programs.

The CDC is working with Pennsylvania health officials to interview the woman 
and her family to try to figure out how she might have picked up the strain. 
The woman had not travelled outside the country recently, officials said.

The colistin-resistant gene has been seen in animals and people in China, 
Europe and Canada. Federal officials said on Thursday that colistin-resistant E 
coli has also been found in a pig in the US, but there was nothing to link the 
finding to the Pennsylvania case.

Researchers at Walter Reed national military medical center, who did the 
confirmatory tests, reported on the Pennsylvania case on Thursday in a journal 
of the American Society of Microbiology.

 