
The US has said it will press for the release of a Pakistani doctor who has 
been jailed for 33 years for running a fake CIA vaccination programme as part 
of the hunt forOsama bin Laden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen>
.

The US state department said there is "no basis" for the arrest and detention 
of Dr Shakil Afridi, the former surgeon-general of Khyber, who was convicted of 
treason over the scheme to identify Bin Laden through DNA.

But even as senior American politicians denounced the sentence as 
"outrageous", theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> shied away from 
strong comment on the trial itself as officials said that the legal process is 
not at an end. Officials are hoping that the sentence can be shortened or 
overturned on appeal.

"We continue to see no basis for these charges, for him being held, for any of 
it," said the state department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland. "We will continue 
to make representations."

Privately, Obama administration officials are angered by Afridi's arrest and 
trial which is further evidence of the sharp deterioration in relations with 
Pakistan. They say that the doctor did not act againstPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> but against al-Qaida.

Two US senators, John McCain and Carl Levin, denounced Afridi's conviction and 
demanded his immediate release.

"Afridi's actions were completely consistent with the multiple, 
legally-binding resolutions passed over many years by the United Nations 
Security Council, which required member states to assist in bringing Osama bin 
Laden and his al-Qaida network to justice," the two senior Senators on the 
armed services committee said in a joint statement.

"Afridi set an example that we wish others in Pakistan had followed long ago. 
He should be praised and rewarded for his actions, not punished and slandered.

"At a time when the US and Pakistan need more than ever to work constructively 
together, Afridi's continuing imprisonment and treatment as a criminal will 
only do further harm to US-Pakistani relations, including diminishing 
Congress's willingness to provide financial assistance to Pakistan."

Congressman Dana Rohrabacher, chairman of a foreign affairs subcommittee, 
demanded the Obama administration take punitive action against Pakistan.

"This is decisive proof Pakistan sees itself as being at war with us," he said.

Afridi's sentence will further alarm western critics of Pakistan who say the 
country has put far more effort into trying to understand how US spies and 
special forces were able to plan and launch the Bin Laden raid than into how 
the al-Qaida leader was able to remain for so long in the Pakistani army 
garrison town of Abbottabad.

The sentence was announced just days after Barack Obama snubbed the Pakistani 
president,Asif Ali Zardari <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>
, by refusing to hold a formal meeting with him at the Nato conference in 
Chicago.

In January, Leon Panetta, the US defence secretary, said he was "very 
concerned" about the arrest of Afridi after Pakistan's intelligence service 
discovered he had set up a fake hepatitis B vaccination scheme with his nurses 
going from house to house in Abbottabad in the weeks before the raid on Bin 
Laden's hideout in May last year.

"For them to take this kind of action against somebody who was helping to go 
after terrorism, I just think it is a real mistake on their part," Panetta said 
in January.

There had been hopes that Afridi would eventually be quietly released after 
the controversy surrounding the Bin Laden raid had subsided.

US intelligence officials say the clandestine operation by Afridi did not 
succeed in determining whether Bin Laden was in the house and the raid went 
ahead without any certainty that the Navy Seal team would find its target.

However, Pakistani security officials recently told the Guardian that although 
the nurses working for Afridi were not allowed inside the house to vaccinate 
any of the children, they did succeed in getting a mobile phone number for 
someone in the house.

The Pakistani sources say that phone call allowed the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> to make a voice match to Bin Laden's 
private courier, a man known as Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti.

US aid groups have complained that the bogus vaccination operation undermined 
their efforts "to eradicate polio, provide critical health services, and extend 
life-saving assistance during times of crisis" in Pakistan. The ruse may have 
fuelled fears, backed by religious extremists, that polio drops are a western 
conspiracy to sterilise the population.
 