
Photography <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/photography> is a 
mechanical art. The photographer points a lens at an object, records the image 
on a plate or film or, today, in digital memory. Therefore all photographs 
should be similar, the hands of individual photographers unrecognisable. Yet 
the new Photographs Gallery at the V&A, which opened on Monday to showcase the 
world's oldest museum collection of photographs, reveals the apparently 
limitless variety of the art and the utterly personal genius of great 
photographers.

A photograph of a steam train taken by Alfred Stieglitz in 1902 hangs near 
Henri Cartier-Bresson's 1932 picture Behind Gare St Lazare, Paris, on the 
blue-painted wall of the long, elegantly restored, Victorian gallery.

Both black and white prints portray a ragged industrial landscape of rail 
tracks in brooding weather. But they are so profoundly different that you 
almost feel you are looking at two different art forms, two technologies. 
Cartier-Bresson's image is so light and mobile, an impression of a passing 
moment, whose meaning is as enigmatic as it is poignant. Stieglitz gives his 
print a monumental power, a weight, that is the very opposite: a column of 
black smoke assumes iron authority.

Lightness and weight, the momentary and the enduring: right from its invention 
at the close of the Romantic age, photography displayed these extreme 
possibilities in its nature. The oldest photograph in the V&A collection is an 
ethereal silvery phantom of aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
street in 1839, taken using Louis Daguerre's pioneering method in the year he 
made it public. By the 1850s photographers were shooting such diverse 
masterpieces as Robert Howlett's 1857 portrait of the engineer Isambard Kingdom 
Brunel, cigar at the corner of his mouth, tall hat on his head, the chains of 
the Great Eastern falling into Miltonic darkness behind him, and John Murray's 
icily majestic panorama of the Taj Mahal, taken in about 1855. The camera could 
capture the craggily real – Brunel lives for ever in his portrait – or the 
stupendously beautiful.

It is hard to tear your eyes from these early photographs. There is something 
so still and ethereal about their long exposures, so haunting about seeing, up 
close, the bumps on the skin of a Victorian likeAlfred Tennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson> in a portrait by Julia 
Margaret Cameron. The V&A opened in 1857 and was the first museum in the world 
to collect photographs – so it has some remarkable things from that age 
including a gorgeous still life of Venetian goblets on shelves presented by its 
patron Prince Albert. With its exquisite, uncluttered choice of such 
superlative prints, this new gallery fulfils the wildest dreams of Prince 
Albert and pays homage to the sheer beauty of great photographs. Today, with 
the camera more universal than ever, this is bound to be a popular part of the 
museum – on the press day frustrated visitors kept trying to beg entry, unable 
to wait for the opening – and perhaps what it will offer most of all is a 
resource, a reservoir of some of the most powerful and glorious camera works of 
all time, to inspire today's practitioners.

The gallery only covers photography up to the 1960s. The museum says that 
afterwards there was a "shift" in the nature of the medium. We all know how 
incredibly diverse photography is today, from CCTV images to pictures taken on 
phones. But has it ever been any less diverse?

Far from a stable and simple golden age of photography when everyone knew what 
a camera was for and artistic excellence was easily defined, this gallery 
reveals the camera's first 130 years to be as restless and experimental as 
anything since.

A landscape by Ansel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams> takes your breath away 
in a manner quite alien to the magnified stilled milk splash photographed by 
American experimentalist Harold Edgerton in 1957 (the only colour print here).

This is a sumptuous gallery in which you could spend days meditating on the 
apparently limitless potential for poetry and emotion in what – by the time you 
leave – it seems absurd to call a mechanical way of making pictures.

• This article was amended on 25 October 2011. The original referred to the 
magnified stilled milk splash photographed by British experimentalist Harold 
Edgerton. This has been corrected.
 