
IIn her subtle and authoritative 1998 book The Imperfect Life of TS Eliot, 
Lyndall Gordon <http://www.lyndallgordon.net/books/index.html> argues that the 
poet's second marriage, entered into when he was 68 years old, was a 
symbolically as well as personally satisfying final chapter: "For him, paradise 
followed purgatory with the same logic that purgatory had followed the hell of 
his first marriage."Valerie Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/12/valerie-eliot>, who died this 
week, put it more earthily – if, on closer reading, slightly disturbingly: "He 
obviously needed to have a happy marriage. He wouldn't die until he'd had it. 
There was a little boy in him that had never been released." Ever since the age 
of 14, when she heard John Gielgud's recording of"Journey of the Magi" 
<http://www.therecusant.org.uk/#/saving-journey-of-the-magi/4564584483>, her 
life was geared towards meeting Eliot; she was 38 when he died, eight years 
after they married, and she spent nearly 50 years guarding, burnishing and 
managing his memory.

This was, necessarily, both a privileged and a sometimes complicated and 
uncomfortable position to occupy. Eliot wanted nothing to do with a biography, 
so Valerie never authorised one. The Eliot estate charged for anything more 
than "fair use", which often meant no more than five or six lines of the poetry.
Peter Ackroyd, in his 1984 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v06/n20/christopher-ricks/the-braver-thing> biography, 
was forced to resort to paraphrase (and then to endure reviewers cavilling at 
the quality of his rewordings). Gordon was under the same strictures, though, 
she says now, "the truth is, I hardly paraphrased – I hardly changed things." 
But Valerie – according to former Faber managing director and chairman Matthew 
Evans, who supported the deal – was so "bowled over" by a private performance 
of the songs forCats that she also gave entire poems to Andrew Lloyd Webber. 
Cats <http://www.catsthemusical.com/> took £1.4bn in world-wide box office, 
£130m in London alone, a good proportion of which went to Valerie and the Eliot 
estate and then to various prizes and charities. It also made Faber's financial 
position much more secure. Initially, Eliot wanted no correspondence published 
at all, but she "appreciated its importance and fascination" and teased him 
into compliance of a sort: letters could only be published if she did the 
selecting and the editing. She spent years editing the first volume, tracking 
down letter after letter, citation after citation; the second volume took 21 
years to appear; alongside a revised first volume, which by this time had 
acquired a co-editor, Hugh Haughton. The third volume appeared this July, and 
covers one year, 1926-27. Eliot died in 1965; many of the intervening 38 years 
of letters – the boxes and boxes that were in her private possession, for 
instance – will probably not be properly accessible for years.

When Valerie Fletcher finally achieved her dream – announced to her 
headmistress when she left public school – of becoming Eliot's secretary, she 
hid her love so successfully that Eliot wasn't even sure she liked him. Things 
changed only when a mutual friend asked them both to visit her in Italy; Eliot 
wrote back to say "I can't: I'm in love with her." So, as Valerie later put it, 
the friend wrote back and said: "Get on with it." As Robert McCrum wrote some 
years ago, when she showed him their personal scrapbooks, Eliot planned their 
wedding meticulously, and in total secrecy: only her parents and the priest, 
who doubled as best man, were present at the 7:15am ceremony, which was 
followed by a wedding breakfast and a flight to the south of France. "I have so 
much to tell you on Monday so prepare to do no work!" wrote Valerie to her 
colleagues in the typing pool at Faber. "A Daily Express photographer caught us 
in the lounge this evening and a Daily Mail man pursued us to Roquebrune! A 
lovely honeymoon apart from TSE catching flu, and cracking a tooth." They 
quickly settled into happy domesticity. "We used to stay at home and drink 
Drambuie and eat cheese and play Scrabble," Valerie once said. "He loved to win 
at cards, and I always made a point of losing by the time we went to bed." 
Every Sunday night he left a love letter by her bed; "I have kept every one and 
would want them to be published after I die."

Evans, who arrived at Faber the year before Eliot died, and left in 2002, says 
that she was "incredibly supportive and kind, a very loyal and good 
shareholder". Stephen Page is the current publisher and chief executive (both 
men stress that her death changes nothing at Faber, financially). He remembers 
meetings at her flat where, an Epstein bust of Eliot  
<http://pinterest.com/pin/239535273901431513/>peering over her shoulder, she 
served tea and "nice biscuits", and they discussed a trolley-full of new books 
set carefully between them. Little had been changed in the flat since Eliot's 
death. "It was extraordinary working on the correspondence," Haughton says. 
"One could be sitting at Eliot's desk, with his crucifix on the wall, his books 
around you, his editions of Aristotle or of Indian texts. Almost all of them 
would be signed to Valerie with love – he had really wanted to have his love 
for her recognised, all over the place. There was an extraordinary sense of him 
handing everything on to her. There are albums of their early married life – 
every concert, every meal, every journey – archived with little comments about 
what he thought. He was certainly absolutely religiously dedicated to 
commemorating their shared life."

Within six years of his death she had edited and published the facsimile and 
manuscripts ofThe Waste Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9781849023306/the-waste-land-and-other-poems>
, a feat of deciphering handwriting and collating manuscripts still considered 
standard. Her second editorial feat, says Gordon, was the first volume of the 
letters. "I was publishing Eliot'sNew Life [the second volume of her biography, 
now joined to the first inThe Imperfect Life] and I was very clued up about the 
details and the letters and I must say it wastotally accurate. It was very 
impressive." But then it was followed by an increasingly frustrating silence. 
"The charitable view of Mrs Eliot," says Gordon, "was that she was always 
afraid that more material would turn up."

In the last few years of her life Valerie finally opened the way for a series 
of projects: theComplete Prose of TS Eliot online, fully annotated under the 
general editorship ofRonald Schuchard 
<http://www.english.emory.edu/people/faculty/schuchard.htm> (there proved to be 
too much of it to print), will be published jointly by Faber and Johns Hopkins 
University Press this coming spring; theCollected Prose, edited by Archie 
Burnett (but without annotations), is to be published in six print volumes in 
2014, as isThe Complete Poems, edited by Christopher Ricks and Jim McCue. A 
collected and annotated edition of the plays by John Haffenden is due for 
delivery in 2014; he is also overseeing the publication of the letters.

"I think that the dedication to the collecting and publication of the letters 
will be the most important and greatly positive thing she did," Haughton says. 
He believes that even after Eliot died, Valerie did what she had always done; 
at some profound level, she "continued, as it were, to take dictation". "But as 
keeper of the flame and shielding Eliot from the attention of biographers – 
that will be the question mark over her legacy. Her refusal to countenance 
biography has I think been very unhelpful."

"Inevitably, there was some harm done to his reputation in the absence of 
access and permission, but it won't be lasting harm," Schuchard believes. "On 
balance I think she took the right, hard course over the long haul. Eliot's 
work will stand for itself; he needs no apologists." Having said that, "The new 
editions of his letters, poetry, prose and drama will dramatically change the 
way we see him."

And she brought something to the books she edited that very few others could. 
"She loved poetry, and she loved Eliot's work," Gordon says. "She saw that 
there was a simplicity to Eliot in spite of the apparent difficulty. She saw 
him in the best light, and he probably was at his best with her. I think she 
honestly saw the very good side of him and that was her good fortune."

• This article was amended on 21 November 2012. The original said that TS Eliot
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ts-eliot> entered into his second marriage 
when he was 67, rather than 68, years old, and that the the second volume of 
his letters took 11, rather than 21, years to appear after the first volume. 
This has been corrected.
 