
Thirty-five years ago, a four-piece American guitar band set about changing 
rock music for ever. They took their name from a brotherly relationship; they 
had a goofy, Jewish singer with family connections to New York bohemia; they 
added pop hooks and smarts to fast, aggressive guitar music; their debut album 
included a song with the word "punk" in its title; and they weren't the Ramones.

Of course, you wouldn't believe Van Halen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/van-halen> were the most important American 
band of the late 70s if you only read rock critics. They were too popular, too 
vulgar, too much, too soon. They celebrated idiocy. So did the Ramones, of 
course, but Van Halen's idiocy was of a different order to punk's: it wasn't 
built around comic-book humour, but on David Lee Roth's apparent range of 
interests, which ran the gamut of pursuits from casual sex to casual 
intoxication, with nothing in between. The tension between Roth's goofiness and 
stellar guitarist Eddie van Halen's desire to be taken seriously was at the 
heart of their music, and eventually tore the pair apart.

Van Halen, legend holds, were spotted by Gene Simmons of Kiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kiss>, playing at the Starwood club in Los 
Angeles in 1976. Simmons was so impressed he flew the band to New York to 
produce a session for them at his own expense. All the elements that instantly 
identify Van Halen were present on the Simmons demos: it's no wonder that when 
they came to record their official debut, it took just days, with minimal 
overdubbing. Roth was already a blowhard, Eddie's guitar technique was clearly 
light years ahead of the competition, Alex Van Halen and Michael Anthony were a 
thunderous rhythm section.

Their signature sound was clean, precise and full of attack: there's 
absolutely no fat on the songs that made their name. Where heavy rock's use of 
the blues had previously been trudging and unwieldy, Van Halen added a sense of 
flight, taking away the swing, speeding even a simple 12-bar into something 
entirely unrelated to its source. They closed their debut album with a version 
of John Brim's old blues Ice Cream Man, and even then you can't imagine, say, 
Humble Pie coming up with such a confection.

That debut was nothing short of a paradigm shift in the sound of heavy music, 
as important as Jimi Hendrix's first record had been a decade before, and 
Nirvana's second would be in closing the era Van Halen began. It sounded like 
nothing before it, yet also like it could have been made at any time until 
Nevermind was released 13 years later: that's an awfully long time to sound 
undated. But the bands Van Halen spawned, sadly, were pallid imitators without 
Van Halen's invention and skill. Van Halen had transformed rock by unwittingly 
creating music's most profitable rubbish dump.

The difference between Van Halen and the hair metallers who followed was what 
always separates game-changers from imitators: their wide listening habits. In 
his first big interview, Eddie Van Halen explained: "Dave our singer doesn't 
even own a stereo. He listens to the radio, which is a good variety … Most of 
our songs you can sing along with, even though it does have the peculiar guitar 
and end-of-the-world drums."

Not that Roth cared about being refracted through hair metal. In fact, he 
boasted, that wasn't the real extent of Van Halen's influence. As he told the 
writer Lisa Robinson in 1984, at the peak of the band's powers: "I know for a 
fact that to a small degree, we've bred a small legion of imitators, copycats, 
mimics, people who are using Van Halen for their sole inspiration. But even 
more important than that are all the people who are just disgusted and revolted 
by our music and our presence and our appearance and the way I do interviews, 
and they've been forced to come up with some very substantial musical 
alternatives to Van Halen-type rock, and that's why we have new wave."

That interview shows a fascinating man toying with his interrogator. Roth 
references John Cassavetes and George Bernard Shaw, but still pins down what 
Van Halen really meant: "I would still prefer to think of us as witless and 
tasteless. Arch enemy of the common public. That's all I wanted to be in life, 
really. I always wanted to be an outrage to public decency and a threat to 
women. And this is one of the few occupations where you're not only allowed 
that, but you're encouraged."
 