
• It seemed an innocent enough little rant at the time. Hitting out at Wall 
Street bonuses,Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
declared that he wouldn't tolerate lavish corporate junkets in which 
loss-making bankers swan around casinos in Las Vegas.

"You can't get corporate jets, you can't go take a trip to Las Vegas or go 
down to the Super Bowl on the taxpayer's dime," said Obama.

He didn't foresee the wrath of a certain Oscar Goodman, who is mayor of Las 
Vegas and who is hopping mad. Goldman Sachs, Wells Fargo and Citigroup have all 
cancelled events in Vegas, wary of arousing political ire, and Sin City's 
hospitality industry is counting the cost.

"When you make a casual, although not malevolent remark, it can have 
ramifications which affect the industry as well as all of the citizens who live 
in southern Nevada," said Goodman, who feels the president's outburst was 
"outrageous".

Goodman, depicted here flanked by showgirls 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/washington/2009/02/obama-las-vegas.html>, has 
written to the White House to complain. And he isn't the only vocal advocate 
for the desert city. The senate majority leader, Harry Reid, is from Nevada and 
is anxiously carrying out damage control on behalf of the electorally swinging 
state.

"The president knows that Las Vegas is America's premier destination to do 
business," said senator Reid after an urgent chat with Obama's chief of staff, 
Rahm Emanuel. To calm ruffled feathers, Obama has accepted an invitation to 
visit the city in the spring or summer. No doubt he is honing his crapshooting 
skills at this very moment.

• The world obviously needs new ways to lose money and a prominent New York 
hedge fund manager, Bill Ackman, has hit upon one. Ackman has a $2bn fund 
solely dedicated to investing in the cut-price American retail chain Target.

The fund, called Pershing Square IV, has been a disaster. It has lost 89.5% 
since inception in 2007. Its value fell by 40% last month alone. Ackman was 
obliged to write an apologetic letter to investors this week, conceding: 
"Bottom line, PSIV has been one of the greatest disappointments of my career to 
date."

Ackman is no fool. He shot to prominence last year by correctly spotting the 
hollowness of monoline financial insurance companies which lost billions by 
protecting banks against default on ill-considered derivatives. But an ordinary 
mortal might question whether a hedge fund predicated on a single bet is truly 
a sensible idea.

In common with other retailers, Target has been hit by America's economic 
downturn - but it isn't doing spectacularly terribly. Jokingly pronounced 
"Tar-jay" in middle class circles to increase its social cachet, the chain is a 
kind of miniature Wal-Mart and does a brisk trade in household basics and 
bargain clothing.

If Ackman's investors had simply bought regular shares in Target rather than 
going through his highly leveraged hedge fund, they would have lost about 8% in 
January and would only be down 39% over 12 months.

Ackman is trying to get Target to spin off the land under its shops into a 
real estate investment trust, arguing that this will increase shareholder 
value. Maybe it will.

But anybody, from Warren Buffett down to the most basic of investment 
textbooks, will advise that putting all your money into one stock is dangerous. 
Wasn't it this kind of reckless, highly leveraged casino capitalism that got us 
into the mess we're in right now?

• During Wednesday's gruelling seven-hour hearing before the House financial 
services committee, the nation's top bankers did their best to pretend their 
firms are on a firm, sustainable financial footing.

The masters of the universe (or "corporal of the universe" as Bank of 
America's Ken Lewis modestly termed himself) assured congressmen they would pay 
back taxpayers' bail-out funds with interest and that their industry would 
eventually emerge in blooming health.

But what would happen if the economy drastically deteriorated further? One 
congressman, Bill Foster, wanted to know how many of America's eight top banks 
would survive if unemployment rose to 11%, property prices slumped by a further 
25% and commercial real estate went into a tailspin.

"We'd survive," Morgan Stanley's John Mack chirped up, swiftly echoed by his 
peers along the length of the witness table.

This sent the committee chairman, Barney Frank, into a funny turn.

"At some point this evening, I'm going to be seized with an image of the eight 
of you standing up and singing 'I will survive'," announced Frank. What a 
charming prospect.
 