
Keira Knightley <https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley> on Friday 
conceded that she does do a lot of costume drama, from Elizabeth Bennet to Anna 
Karenina. "I don't know why. I love them. I think it's a taste thing. I love 
history and I love reading history books so it's a privilege that it's part of 
my job."

Knightley was speaking at the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> after the screening of 
her latest film, A Dangerous Method, in which she once again dons period 
costume, playing a Russian diagnosed with hysteria who has a pivotal role in 
the birth of psycho analysis. Her performance as Sabina Spielrein has gained 
considerable praise. The film, directed by David Cronenberg from a script by 
Christopher Hampton, charts the development of psychoanalysis with Viggo 
Mortensen as Freud and Michael Fassbender as Jung.

Knightley said she did a considerable amount of research, first turning to 
Hampton, who gave her a big pile of books. "It was biography, translations of 
books and notes, [Spielrein's] diaries. I spoke to psychoanalysts as well," 
Knightley said.

Fassbender's method was different: "I got a great book, it was like Jung for 
children – an idiot's handbook. I think I found pretty much everything that I 
needed to find in that little book."

If the energetic applause and cheers in Venice are anything to go by, this 
could be Cronenberg's year at the film festival. But there are other portents 
as well. Cronenberg said on Friday: "This is the 68th festival and I'm 68. The 
opening film was The Ides of March and that's my birthday."

At a good-natured press conference Cronenberg joked that his actors could do 
with some therapy. "My cast has a great need of psychoanalysis and that is why 
I cast them – to introduce them gently to the idea that they needed help."

Knightley was recently on the west end stage in Lillian Hellman's 
Broadway-bound The Children's Room and is soon to appear in Joe Wright's 
version of Anna Karenina

In A Dangerous Method <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-dangerous-method> 
she plays a patient who associates sexual pleasure with the beatings given to 
her by her father and manages to persuade Jung to beat her.Cronenberg has been 
making films for nearly 40 years, starting with Shivers and then making 
memorable movies such as Scanners, The Fly, Naked Lunch and Eastern Promises.

He told journalists that he shot less footage than he used to and edited more 
quickly but the way he makes films remained the same. "Each movie tells you 
what it needs and I give it that."

Making a period piece was exciting, he said: "It's a challenge, you can't just 
put people in costumes and film. There are some actors who somehow cannot 
transpose them in to a different time. They don't work somehow in the past 
whereas other actors can transform themselves.

"When you read what we read from that era, it is very different. I think 
people's brains were different in the past, I think our brains have changed 
because of technology and all kinds of things."The stars of A Dangerous Method 
join a slew of A-list stars who have been motorboating across to the Venice 
Lido this week, including George Clooney, Kate Winslet and Madonna. That trend 
is set to continue with the arrival of Matt Damon,Gwyneth Paltrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gwynethpaltrow> and Jude Law for Steven 
Soderbergh's global disaster movie Contagion, one of 22 movies competing for 
the Golden Lion.

And then the British arrive, with Steve McQueen's Shame, starring Fassbender 
andCarey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>, which 
premiers on Sunday. On Monday, Gary Oldman, Colin Firth and John Hurt are 
expected on the Lido for Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy and Andrea Arnold 
completes the UK challenge with Wuthering Heights on Tuesday.
 