 A decision on whether to strike from the medical register the pathologist at 
the centre of the Alder Hey organs scandal will not be made until at least 
Monday, the regulatory body for doctors said today.
A disciplinary committee of the General Medical Council (GMC) charged with 
determining whether Dick van Velzen is guilty of serious professional 
misconduct has been adjourned until next week.

The GMC fitness to practise panel, sitting in Manchester, sent all parties 
involved in the hearing home, saying they would not make a decision before 
Monday.

The panel yesterday found 46 out of 48 charges proved against the Dutch 
pathologist, who took organs from children without relatives' consent while he 
was head of foetal and infant pathology at Liverpool's Alder Hey children's 
hospital between 1988 and 1994.

If found guilty, Professor van Velzen could be struck off the medical 
register. The GMC suspended him from practising medicine in the UK four years 
ago, but that suspension expires on August 1.

Andrew Collender QC, counsel for the GMC, said during the hearing that 
Professor van Velzen had caused the parents of the children whose organs he 
removed "considerable and understandable distress".

More than 2,000 pots containing body parts from around 850 infants were 
discovered at Alder Hey hospital during a public inquiry into the retention 
scandal.

The panel heard from Paul Dearlove, a former laboratory officer at Alder Hay, 
that Professor van Velzen kept the pots of body parts in a "filthy" cellar 
below his laboratory.

Mr Dearlove said some of the organs had deteriorated because they had been 
retained for so long and that a few of the labels were wearing off the pots due 
to damp. "The cellar was filthy and there was so much material in some of the 
pots that it was in quite a bad condition," he said.

"Some of the material was kept in pots with plastic lids and the formula in 
one or two of them dried out, which meant the samples deteriorated rapidly. In 
the end we had to abandon care of the pots because it was just too big a task."

Professor van Velzen, from Oegstgeest in Holland, was not present at the 
hearing and did not send any legal representation on his behalf.

A public inquiry into the scandal found that between 1989 and 1995, the 
professor systematically ordered the "unethical and illegal stripping of every 
organ from every child who had had a post mortem".

Hundreds of distressed parents, who had been unaware they had buried their 
children with missing body parts, were forced to hold second funerals once the 
truth emerged.
 