
The federal government will set up an advisory body to encourage private 
businesses to do more to recruit veterans and has promised to lead by example 
in employing them.

On Thursday, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, announced the 
government will establish an advisory committee of corporations that will help 
industry develop strategies to recruit and retain veterans in employment.

Participating businesses will be given the title “Veteran Employment 
Ambassador” and the government will give awards to businesses of all sizes that 
employ veterans.

The government has also promised a “no discharge without documentation” policy 
to guarantee proper paperwork when someone leaves the military. Veterans will 
receive job coaching and materials to help find work.

Launching the initiative at Kirribilli House with veterans and business 
leaders, Turnbull said the program was “not about charity, we’re not asking 
businesses to engage in some sort of philanthropic exercise”.


He spoke about the skills of ex-servicemen and women including use of 
state-of-the art technology, logistics, resilience, loyalty and courage.

Turnbull said the government would “never instruct business to hire veterans 
as a patriotic obligation” but invited them to “feel free to do so”. He 
committed the government to “act as an exemplar in employing ex-servicemen and 
women”.

The veterans affairs minister, Dan Tehan, told ABC News Breakfast that 5,500 
defence force personnel leave the military every year and they spend an average 
of 7.5 years in the force.

“They have wonderful skills. They learn wonderful things while they’re serving 
our country and those skills are readily deployable to the civilian workforce,” 
he said.

Military suicide rate 'a national shame' as 41 take own lives since start of 
2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/military-suicide-rate-a-national-shame-as-41-take-own-lives-in-12-months>
“What we are doing today is making sure that business in Australia and the 
public sector ... understand [their] skills ... so when they transition away 
from defence life to civilian life, those employers recognise those skills and 
will seek to employ our retiring defence personnel.”

Tehan told ABC’s AM the government’s initiative would “ensure” that business 
and the public sector “are considering veterans when they are advertising jobs”.

Labor’s defence spokesman, Richard Marles, and veterans’ affairs spokeswoman, 
Amanda Rishworth, welcomed the veterans’ employment program and suggested a 
review within 12 months to ensure it is effective.

“Labor has long said when there is more we can do to support our veterans it 
should be done,” they said. “We know employment opportunities for veterans and 
their families create better opportunities for transition into civilian life.”

Tehan also trumpeted measures in the 2016 budget to deal with post-traumatic 
stress disorder, depression, anxiety and alcohol and substance abuse.

“Now anyone who has served for a day currently with our military or who is now 
a veteran ... you can get free access to the treatment in those areas. It 
doesn’t have to be service-related.”

A report in August found that 41 military personnel and veterans had taken 
their own lives this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/military-suicide-rate-a-national-shame-as-41-take-own-lives-in-12-months>
,the same as the number of Australians who were killed in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/03/australian-soldier-died-afghanistan-identified>
 during 13 years of war.
 