
11.46am GMT 

So that's it from me, a strange, strange final, not of the highest quality but 
of high drama. Li was the better player for much of the match, and but for the 
twisted ankle and bruised head, maybe she would have won. The match was on her 
racket: she hit 36 winners to Azarenka's 18, but 57 errors to Azarenka's 28. 
Credit to Azarenka for the way she toughed it out. Thanks for reading/emailing 
today and please tune back tomorrow. I believe someone called Andy Murray is 
playing then. Bye.

Updated at 11.46am GMT

11.43am GMT 

Trophy time. Azarenka chats and smiles with Li as the speeches begin. Which go 
on for a while. A tournament suit then introduces Li with the priceless: "She's 
bruised, battered and quite possibly buggered." You wouldn't get Sue Barker 
saying that at Wimbledon. Despite being in the wars, Li manages to skip up to 
collect her runners-up plate. "First I have to congratulate Victoria. Well 
done," she says. "Thanks to my team. Two weeks ago I hated them, they pushed me 
a lot. But I should shut up. Thanks to Carlos. Thanks to all the fans for 
supporting me. I'm looking forward to next year." Li's husband escapes her 
tongue this time. No mention of him.

Azarenka then steps up to receive the trophy from the great Margaret Court. 
"Good evening everybody. It's been a really long two weeks for me, there are so 
many things I'd like to say, but I'll try to keep it short. I want to thank my 
team for being there for me ... the ballboys and girls ... the fans. I will 
always have very special memories of this court. I wish Li the best of luck for 
the rest of the year. Happy Australia Day everybody." At least the crowd seemed 
to like that.

Updated at 11.57am GMT

11.25am GMT 

Azarenka retains her Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title 4-6, 6-4, 6-3!

So ... Li serving to stay in the final. At 0-15 she goes for a gutsy second 
serve out wide to the ad court, before firing to the deuce court. The classic 
one-two punch, straight out of the tennis textbook. 15-all. 30-15, with a 
passing winner as Azarenka slids and slides at the net. 30-all. A huge point. 
Will it become game point or will it become match point? Game point, as Li 
strikes a backhand into Azarenka's body. But then, giving herself little margin 
for error, she nets. And then drags wide. Suddenly from 40-30 it's advantage 
Azarenka, championship point for the defending champion. Li misses on her first 
serve, makes her second, but after Azarenka returns down the middle, Li goes 
long! Azarenka defends her Australian Open title and remains the world No1. She 
does her usual my-finger-is-a-gun salute, but the celebrations are a little 
muted. She looks slightly unsure of what to do. No surprise considering the way 
the crowd have treated her tonight. And she then sobs into her towel. Perhaps 
tears more of relief than joy. Credit to the Belarusian for overcoming the 
hostility and pulling away in the third set. That took some toughness.

Updated at 11.55am GMT

11.20am GMT 

Third set: Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 5-3 Li* (*denotes next server)

At 0-30, Li has a big chance on Azarenka's second serve. But she overcooks the 
backhand return. 15-30. And then throws in another error. Mr Li offers an 
encouraging fist pump. Mrs Li grimaces. From 30-all, the two duke it out from 
the back of the court. Instead of pulling the trigger this time, Li throws in a 
moon ball, and Azarenka, distracted, nets. 30-40. But then Li reverts back to 
her first-strike tennis and makes the error. Deuce. Azarenka dispatches an 
inside-out forehand winner. Game point for 5-3, which would put the world No1 
in touch of retaining her title. And she takes it.

11.14am GMT 

Third set: *Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 4-3 Li (*denotes next server)

Speaking of left to right, or right to left, Li has Azarenka scampering around 
the baseline for most of this game as she holds to 30. She also throws in a 
great body serve too, which has Azarenka flummoxed. Li's former coach, the 
downtrodden Mr Li, and Li's current coach, Carlos Rodriguez, both liked that.

11.11am GMT 

Third set: Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 4-2 Li* (*denotes next server)

Azarenka rattles through to love. Not something I've written too often. And 
here's Mac Millings: "I don't know if the bamboo theory of vertical writing is 
true (although it does sound plausible), but I do know that Chinese is still 
sometimes written that way, as well as left-to-right, and also right-to-left - 
it doesn't seem to matter. My favourite script-direction (what's wrong with 
having a favourite script-direction?) isboustrophedon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boustrophedon>. Greek for something approximating 
"as the ox turns", it's when you write a line from left-to-right, then at the 
end you turn around and do the next line right-to-left,writing the letters 
backwards. I can't see why we don't all do that."

Updated at 11.13am GMT

11.08am GMT 

Third set: *Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 3-2 Li (*denotes next server)

A glimmer for Azarenka at 15-30. Which becomes more than a glimmer when Li 
fires out. Li appeals to Hawk-Eye. The Aussies chant "IN, IN, IN." They're 
wrong. 15-40, two break points. We haven't seen many of those today. Just the 
28. Azarenka thinks she's won the point, yelps "C'MON," but it's called out. 
Hawk-Eye shows it clipped the line by a whisker. Azarenka should probably be 
given the point, Li wasn't going to get that back. But the umpire Alison Lang 
says they'll replay the point. Azarenka is not happy. But credit to her, she 
doesn't argue for too long, no doubt with timeoutgate at the back of her mind. 
Justice is done as Azarenka prevails on the next point.

"It strikes me that Azarenka should stop worrying about what the crowd think, 
and go the 'wrestling bad-guy' route," suggests Matt Dony. "Ask herself, 'What 
would Sgt. Slaughter do?' He would have argued a whole lot more about that 
challenged point. Feed off the boos!"

Updated at 11.12am GMT

11.01am GMT 

Third set: Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 2-2 Li* (*denotes next server)

Play resumes. Azarenka is 15-0 ahead. Make that 30-0. But two big, big 
forehands from Li, both hitting the lines. 30-all. Maybe she should get hit on 
the head more often. Another line, this time from a thunderbolt of a forehand 
return. 30-40. But Azarenka gives back as good as she gets, deuce. Advantage 
Azarenka. Game Azarenka.

Updated at 12.20pm GMT

10.54am GMT 

Would you have it. More drama. The fireworks stop. Play commences. On the 
first point, Li's left ankle buckles as she's going for a backhand winner. It's 
the same ankle she injured in the second set. But as she falls, she manages to 
whack her head. Poor Li is really in the wars today. First she looks like she's 
going to cry, then she breaks into a smile when the trainers asks her where she 
is. Or maybe what her name is. After all the name chat from you lot today, she 
probably doesn't even know herself. Another timeout it is, then. So Azarenka 
has now been on the receiving end of two timeouts. Oh the irony.

Updated at 11.02am GMT

10.51am GMT 

Some emails.

"Enormous thanks to James Errington and James Mellors. So, "Grace Li Na" it 
must be :-) I have a question for James Mellors - is it true that the vertical 
writing style that characterises Chinese script for millenia, until very 
recently in fact, was defined because in the earlierst days they used bamboo to 
write on? Bamboo being, well, vertical. All I can say, as everyone else here in 
Beijing says, is "Li Na, Jia You"! (which seems to mean "Add petrol, Li Na"). 
What did they shout before cars were invented?" – Andrew Benton.

And a question more on my level: "Morning Katy. This has probably been asked 
(and answered) before, but is Li Na the shortest name in tennis?" – Simon 
McMahon.

Meanwhile, Matt Dony's a simple guy. He's just enjoying the fireworks: "Aaah! 
Oooh! Aaah!"

Updated at 10.52am GMT

10.45am GMT 

Ho hum. Apparently they could last for nine minutes. The players wait. 
Azarenka gets the trainer on, at least she can't be accused of gamesmanship 
here. Not sure how good a nine-minute break will be for Li's swollen ankle. And 
more phonetics fun courtesy of Matt Clarke: "James Mellors is a bit wrong too, 
‘Na’/‘娜’ is only used in names; however the same character can be pronounced 
'Nuo' (2nd tone) which means graceful but only when combined with another 
character, eg with ‘E’/‘婀’ in the word 'Enuo'/'婀娜'. Who needs tennis when 
language offers this kind of topsy-turvy entertainment?" Indeed.

Updated at 10.45am GMT

10.41am GMT 

Third set: *Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 1-2 Li (*denotes next server)

15-0. 30-0. 40-0. 40-15. Game. Not much to see there. But plenty to see in the 
sky, because here come the fireworks ...

10.39am GMT 

Third set: Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 1-1 Li* (*denotes next server)

From the ridiculous to the sublime for Li as she powers 0-15 ahead. Another 
forehand swat and it's 0-30, though that was a poor shot from Azarenka, she 
should have manoeuvred Li further out wide. But 0-30 quickly becomes 30-all, 
which in turn becomes 40-30 as Li nets on two successive points. But then the 
swinging, conquering Li is back, deuce. Advantage Li. Game, as Azarenka 
doubles. No sign/sound of the fireworks yet ...

10.33am GMT 

Third set: *Azarenka 4-6, 6-4, 1-0 Li (*denotes next server)

You still feel the outcome of this match is down to Li. If she can get herself 
together, she has the bigger shots. But at the moment she seems to have 
mentally checked out (though at least she hasn't wandered off court for 10 
minutes, mind). 0-30. 15-40, following a wild slash at a forehand. She'd done 
all the hard work, had virtually the whole court to aim into, and sent it into 
row Z. Azarenka then feasts on a short ball to break to 15. This is the first 
time the world No1's been ahead since the opening game of the match.

10.30am GMT 

Azarenka wins the second set 6-4

Li, having been on a few games ago, is now most definitely off. 15-0. 30-0. 
She then goes for a clean winner down the line, the odds were never with her to 
make that. Reckless. 40-0. Three set points for Azarenka. Li sends into the 
tramlines and we're going the distance. Redfoo (wearing aleapordskin coat, 
almost as bad as Federer's pink shoes) rises.

10.26am GMT 

Second set: *Azarenka 4-6, 5-4 Li (*denotes next server)

Li promptly slumps 15-40 down. The only thing predictable about this final is 
its unpredictability. Strange, but compelling. And Li balloons a backhand well 
long to hand Azarenka the game. Being so close to winning the title, that was 
sloppy play. Azarenka will serve for the set. I, for one, am not going to 
hazard a guess as to what will happen.

Updated at 10.26am GMT

10.23am GMT 

Second set: Azarenka 4-6, 4-4 Li* (*denotes next server)

Li shows plenty of graceful footwork and play in this game. She first gets to 
0-30 on Azarenka's serve. Azarenka then mixes things up by coming into the net, 
a good tactic that, she's a strong volleyer. 15-30. But Azarenka can do little 
more. 15-40. 30-40. Game Li. "Just a wacky match,"tweets Sports Illustrated's 
Jon Wertheim <https://twitter.com/jon_wertheim>. "If you just tuned in you 
wouldn't be able to guess which player turned their ankle 20m ago..."

Updated at 12.16pm GMT

10.18am GMT 

Second set: *Azarenka 4-6, 4-3 Li (*denotes next server)

Two double faults in a row from Li. 15-40. Some heavy Li artillery saves the 
first, Azarenka slaps into the net on the second. Deuce. Azarenka charges 
kamikaze-style into the net, but gives Li too much space to pass. Advantage Li. 
Game. A crucial hold for Li, surely, if she's to have a chance in this set. 
Though the way this final has been going, perhaps it's best not to make any 
predictions. But at least one matter seems to have been settled: "I hate to say 
it (and I know it's not tennis related) but James Errington is a bit wrong," 
writes James Mellors. "The Na, although really uncommon in everyday usage does 
have a meaning. It means graceful. I've just done a phd in the development of 
East Asian writing scripts, so a hopeless nerd about this stuff."

Updated at 12.14pm GMT

10.12am GMT 

Second set: Azarenka 4-6, 4-2 Li* (*denotes next server)

Li even has a spring in her step after firing off another winner to get to 
0-15. She then runs from corner to corner before producing a lovely lob, which 
has Azarenka scampering back and sailing long. 0-30. 0-40. That's five points 
in a row since the timeout. And it's also three break points. Li doesn't take 
the first, doesn't take the second after a net cord gives Azarenka the 
initiative and doesn't take the third as she inexplicably nets. Deuce. 
Advantage Azarenka. The Belarusian knows how to scrap. And she scraps her way 
to game. So that's five points in a row for Azarenka. This final may be 
inconsistent, but it's not short on drama.

10.05am GMT 

Second set: *Azarenka 4-6, 3-2 Li (*denotes next server)

Li is back. She walks OK from her chair back to the baseline, and then bashes 
a backhand cross-court winner. Nothing wrong with her movement there. 40-30. 
Another backhand winner, this time down the line. Li holds. No problems, it 
seems. But no doubt Li would love to break and try and get through this in two 
sets.

10.02am GMT 

The ankle is being taped, Li is going to try and play on, but how restricted 
will her movement be? Azarenka, meanwhile, nibbles on an energy bar before 
practising some serves.

9.58am GMT 

Oh. This doesn't look good. With Li 30-15 ahead on serve, Azarenka mis-hits a 
return, Li gets it back, but then turns her left ankle as she attempts to 
retrieve an Azarenka forehand. This doesn't look good at all. Li calls straight 
for the trainer. It's not clear whether she'll be able to continue, she's 
barely putting any weight on it as she hops back to the chair. There'll be a 
medical timeout. But this time, it's not for Azarenka. A little irony there. 
But let's hope Li will be able to carry on. Replays show the ankle didn't 
completely buckle, but she's clearly in some pain.

Updated at 10.01am GMT

9.54am GMT 

Second set: Azarenka 4-6, 3-1 Li* (*denotes next server)

Azarenka's worst game of the match so far as she's broken to 15, more due to 
her errant groundstrokes than any fireworks from Li. Talking of fireworks, the 
Australia Day ones will be coming up in about 40 minutes if they're still 
playing then. And an email from a helpful James Errington in response to Andrew 
Benton's question: "An email from my colleagues (I work in Beijing) tell me 
that the 'Na' in 'Li Na' is one of those characters just used in names, and 
doesn't have any literal meaning. Not a very interesting answer, sorry."

9.49am GMT 

Second set: *Azarenka 4-6, 3-0 Li (*denotes next server)

And look, another break point for Azarenka. 30-40. An excellent Azarenka 
backhand down the line and Li's forehand misfires. Azarenka has the double 
break. And some first set stats for your perusal: Aces: Azarenka 0 Li 2. Double 
faults: Azarenka 1 Li 1. First serves in: Azarenka 73% Li 73%. First serve 
points won: Azarenka 38% Li 46%. Break points won: Azarenka 3/4 Li 3/4. Winners:
 Azarenka 2 Li 9.Errors: Azarenka 10-17 Li

Updated at 9.49am GMT

9.45am GMT 

Second set: Azarenka 4-6, 2-0 Li* (*denotes next server)

Azarenka bounds 30-15 up. But Li gets into her hitting zone, dictating play 
going left and right, left and right. 30-all. 40-30. Some superb hitting from 
Li follows, she has Azarenka slipping and sliding from corner to corner, 
Azarenka tries to change the pace with a slice backhand but it's a tactic that 
doesn't come off. Deuce. A double fault from Azarenka is again applauded. Break 
point. Undettered, Azarenka responds with a punishing serve. Deuce again. 
Azarenka squeezes through, rounding things off with a forehand that batters the 
side line to within about half a centimetre of its life. The world No1 
consolidates the break.

Updated at 12.12pm GMT

9.38am GMT 

Second set: *Azarenka 4-6, 1-0 Li (*denotes next server)

"High drama in that first set, with an ending that is either hilarious or a 
real pity, depending on your point of view. The only thing that would improve 
it is if someone (obviously Azarenka ...) boots a ball-girl in the ribs," 
reports Matt Dony. She did almost accidentally hit someone in the first set, 
Matt, when she whacked a ball away in frustration. She was pretty quick to 
apologise, no surprise considering the fairly merciless way she's being treated 
by the crowd. From deuce, Azarenka forges her way to advantage, break point... 
what can she do? She sends a strong return deep, Li manages to dig it out of 
her heels but loops long. And would you have it, there'sanother break.

9.31am GMT 

Li wins the first set 6-4

You still sense this match is on Li's racket. When she comes up with the 
winners, Azarenka has little answer. But an error is never too far away. The 
third point – as Li lets rip with a backhand down the line – being a case in 
point. 15-30. But then she goes all wayward and wild, sending a backhand so 
long it probably landed half way to Sydney. 30-all. On. Off. On. Off. On. Off. 
She's on on the next point, with a rocket of a return winner. 30-40, set point. 
Azarenka saves it, deuce. Advantage Azarenka – the best shot from her so far – 
as she hoiks a forehand passing shot beyond Li. Deuce. Advantage Li, a second 
set point. Wonderful play – Azarenka sends Li deep into the forehand corner 
before calmly slotting away the volley. Deuce. This match is starting to warm 
up now. The two go at each other, sending each other back and forth and back 
and forth, no question the best exchange so far. Advantage Li, a third set 
point. But it's not a case of third time lucky. Deuce. Advantage Li, afourth 
set point. Both are still puffing after their escapades a few rallies ago. And 
an enthralling game ends on a disappointing note as Azarenka doubles. Game and 
set Li. That's 13 unanswered sets for her at this Australian Open.

Updated at 12.10pm GMT

9.22am GMT 

First set: *Azarenka 4-5 Li (*denotes next server)

While I consider Andrew's phonetics puzzler, Azarenka rattles her way to 0-15. 
0-30. 0-40. Three break points. She doesn't take the first, but no bother. She 
breaks on the second. Azarenka's boyfriend Redfoo nods appreciatively from the 
stands. So we're back on serve, if there is such a thing in this match. 

Updated at 12.48pm GMT

9.20am GMT 

First set: Azarenka 3-5 Li* (*denotes next server)

So ... Azarenka serving to stay in the first set. She gets to 30-15, but just 
before she's about to throw the ball up to serve, someone in the crowd shouts 
out Li's name. Li goes on to win the point. 30-all. Li goes for broke, 
bludgeoning a backhand down the line, but it goes a foot or so long. And 
Azarenka comes through to 30. And this from Andrew Benton: "Katy, checking 
Wikipedia, I see that the character of Li Na's first name, "Na", is a bit 
unusual - it's got the phonetic bit of a more widely-used "Na" (variously 
meaning "that", "this", "what", "those"), but with a female radical on the left 
hand side. It's not even in my standard and totally excellent dictionary. Help, 
what does her "Na" mean? Did her parents make up a character for her? And does 
she have an English name - "Lena" perhaps?" Erm. Um. Anyone? Anyone? 

9.14am GMT 

First set: *Azarenka 2-5 Li (*denotes next server)

Li is moving so much better on court than she did a year or so ago, credit 
Rodriguez for that. 15-0. 30-0. 40-0, as a Hawk-Eye challenge goes against 
Azarenka. The Aussies, once again, cheer loudly. Azarenka may have pushed the 
boundaries in her semi-final, but the crowd are perhaps starting to push the 
boundaries now. Azarenka looks rattled and Li holds to love. Only the second 
hold of the match and the first game won to love.

Updated at 9.15am GMT

9.10am GMT 

First set: Azarenka 2-4 Li* (*denotes next server)

Having missed that drive volley in the previous game, Li's not going to miss 
another. 0-15. 0-30. She then sends an absolute rocket of a backhand return 
down the line, Azarenka gets a racket to it, but nets. 0-40. Three break 
points. One of the more intense rallies of the final follows, Li blinks first 
as she goes long. 15-40. Another punishing rally, this time finished off with 
another brutal backhand from Li. That's six games played now. There's only been 
one hold of serve. Strange stuff.

9.07am GMT 

First set: *Azarenka 2-3 Li (*denotes next server)

Azarenka dispatches an overhead on the opening point. Maybe that will shake 
off the nerves a little. It looks to have done the trick, she unleashes a 
pin-point cross-court backhand, wrong-footing Li and going behind her opponent. 
30-all. Li dismisses the danger with an ace out wide. Another booming serve out 
wide, Azarenka gets the ball back but skies it, an apparent gimme of a drive 
volley for Li ... but she misses! Deuce. Advantage Li. Deuce - cue a "CMON" 
from Azarenka, she's pushing and probing a little more here – advantage 
Azarenka. Game Azarenka. Another "CMON" and fist pump follows.

Updated at 9.11am GMT

9.01am GMT 

First set: Azarenka 1-3 Li* (*denotes next server)

A first double fault from Azarenka. And a few claps. There's no doubt the 
crowd is in Li's corner. Azarenka's a fairly feisty and determined character, 
but she does look edgy at the moment. The fall-out from Thursday may have got 
to her. From 0-15 Li gets her way to 15-30, make that 15-40 as she unleashes a 
thunderous forehand down the line. Azarenka doesn't move an inch. Li only needs 
one of the break points. After losing the opening game, Li has rattled off 
three in a row. And here's Gary Naylor. "So Australia Day then? I was under the 
impression that they thought every day was Australia Day down there. Has an 
American journo thought about asking Andy Murray whether he would like an 
England Day to inspire him?"

8.56am GMT 

First set: *Azarenka 1-2 Li (*denotes next server)

The longest rally so far on the opening point. Azarenka sends Li left and 
right and left and right, a favoured tactic for the Belarusian, but Li then 
whips a cross-court forehand winner. Great shot. 15-0. Which soon becomes 
30-all. The cameras zoom in on Li's long-suffering husband, Jiang Shan. Li went 
through some indifferent form after her 2011 French Open win, before deciding 
six months ago to demote him from coach to logistical duties (court-booking, 
drink-fixing and racket-stringing, apparently, and of course being the butt of 
Li’s post-match jokes). Maybe there’s a lesson in there for all married 
couples. Though there again, if I fired my accountant husband I’d have to pay 
someone to do my tax return. Anyway, I digress. Back to the tennis. The first 
hold of serve as Li comes through from deuce.

8.51am GMT 

First set: Azarenka 1-1 Li* (*denotes next server)

Li dominates the first two rallies with her piercing forehand. It's such a 
weapon for the world No6. 0-30. Undettered, Azarenka serves out wide to the 
forehand, Li makes the error 15-30. Another serve to the forehand, another 
error. 30-all. But Azarenka then undoes her good work as Li breaks courtesy of 
two Azarenka errors. A strange opening two games littered with mistakes.

Updated at 12.04pm GMT

8.48am GMT 

First set: *Azarenka 1-0 Li (*denotes next server)

Li, perhaps, is feeling the pressure. An inauspicious start as she steps up to 
serve ... and double faults. But she comes out swinging on the next shot, 
fizzing a forehand past a scampering Azarenka. 15-all. 30-15. The crowd cheer 
Azarenka's error, perhaps a little too much. The world No1's clearly got work 
to do in this final to earn back their affections. She's working hard to break. 
30-all becomes 30-40. Break point. Li overhits and there's the break.

8.44am GMT 

A quick teaser in the meantime. Who is the second highest paid female athlete 
behind Sharapova? Serena Williams, right? Wrong. It’s Li. While Sharapova 
earned $28m according to the Forbes 2012 list, Li brought in $18m. That’s what 
a country with a population of 1.3 billion will do for your bank account. 
Around 120 million of those could be watching right now, if the viewing figures 
from Li’s French Open win are anything to go by. No pressure, then.

8.40am GMT 

Tok! Tok! Tokity tok! They're warming up.

8.39am GMT 

The coin toss. But the umpire seems more interested in warning the players 
about the Australia Day fireworks, which could interrupt the final if they're 
still playing at 10.35am our time, 9.35pm in Melbourne. "That one would be a 
legitimate pause," parps John Lloyd on the BBC.

8.36am GMT 

And here they came. Perhaps a whistle or two for Azarenka after her timeout 
shenanigans. Not that she would have heard, she's got her headphones on.

8.32am GMT 
Jon Wertheim (@jon_wertheim) 
Hearing Azarenka cried after the semis when she realized the kerfuffle. Said 
she misunderstood on-court questions....
 <https://twitter.com/jon_wertheim/status/295076268599308288> January 26, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jon_wertheim/status/295076268599308288> 
8.28am GMT 

The head-to-head. Azarenka leads 5-4 and won all three of their matches last 
year. But Li has prevailed in both of their grand slam meetings, on her 2011 
run to the Australian Open final and French Open title.

8.27am GMT 

World No1 watch. Azarenka must defend her title to keep hold of the top spot, 
otherwise Serena will take over. If Azarenka wins then it’s 1) Azarenka 2) 
Serena 3) Sharapova 4) Radwanska 5) Li. If Li does then it’s 1) Serena 2) 
Azarenka 3) Sharapova 4) Radwanska 5) Li.

8.23am GMT 

The Rod Laver patrons are currently being treated to a rendition of Waltzing 
Matilda.Happy Australia Day! 

Updated at 8.34am GMT

8.04am GMT 

Preamble

Good morning and welcome to our game-by-game coverage of the 2013 Australian 
Open women’s final between Serena Williams and Maria Sharapova.

Oh. Sorry.

*quickly changes the script*

The way Williams and Sharapova were playing for the first week and a half, 
only someone braver than Lance Armstrong's lawyer would have bet against them 
making the final. ButSerena was stunned by “the new Serena” Sloane Stephens 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/23/sloane-stephens-australian-open-serena-williams>
, whose runwas then ended by Victoria Azarenka amid timeoutgate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/25/victoria-azarenka-australian-open-final>
. And Sharapova, having conceded only nine games en route to the semi-finals, 
wasbundled out by an inspired Li Na.  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/24/li-na-beats-maria-sharapova-australian-open>
Azarenka and Li had timed their runs to perfection.

Both of today's finalists have Australian Open pedigree. Azarenka is the 
defending champion having won her first major title in Melbourne 12 months ago, 
while Li was the runner-up in 2011 before making her definitive breakthrough at 
the French Open four months later when she became China’s first grand slam 
singles champion.

This is a tough one to predict. Azarenka is the more consistent player, while 
Li has the bigger weapons. But sometimes they misfire. If Li is on her game 
she’s often unbeatable, if she’s off it can get ugly. This could be decided 
where so many tennis matches are; in the head. Azarenka has spent the past two 
days dealing with the fall-out from that near 10-minute timeout against 
Stephens having blown five match points. The controversy could inspire or 
deflate her. Li, meanwhile, appears to have doused the flames of self-doubt 
after firing her husband as coach and hiring Justin Henin’s former mentor 
Carlos Rodriguez.

"Last time I was more excited, more nervous, because it was my first time 
reaching grand slam finals,” Li said. “This time I think I'm more calm, a 
little bit more cool. And this time will also be different because Carlos 
coached Justine, so he has a lot of experience for the final. I should be OK 
this time.”

We will find out at: just after 8.30am GMT.

Updated at 8.06am GMT
 