
When Victoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> 
woke on Sunday morning, still buzzing after just a few hours' sleep, she 
flicked through the hundreds of messages from her friends around the world, 
congratulating her on becoming a grand slam champion and claiming the world No1 
ranking.

Among them was one rather special email, informing her that she had been 
honoured by Belarus for her efforts in winning theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. If she did not already 
know it before, she does now – her life is about to change.

In the hours after her 6-3, 6-0 demolition of Maria Sharapova in the final, 
Azarenka had struggled to get through to her mother, Alla, to share her delight 
in breaking through at the top level. When her mother finally did reach her, 
she just dropped in the news about the honour, casual as you like.

"She was really calm," Azarenka said on Sunday, her trophy never out of arm's 
reach. The confirmation came from the president of Belarus, Alexander 
Lukashenko, that she had been awarded the Order of the Motherland. "Apparently 
I got the honour, the medal," she said. "I don't know how to translate [what it 
stands for into English], but it's really cool."

Azarenka will be reunited with her mother in the United States next week when 
she plays Fed Cup against a United States team who will include Serena and 
Venus Williams. Being world No1 carries with it responsibilities and also makes 
her a target for the chasing pack, but Azarenka said she was ready for it.

"I think a lot more people will have more motivation to beat me and there's 
going to be certain pressure from the media," she said. "It's really exciting 
to go on the court and have somebody on the other side who really, really wants 
to beat you. I enjoy that challenge so much.

"It's going to be another learning experience as to how to balance everything. 
It's going to be a bit difficult but I have great people around me who can help 
me and guide me a little bit more. It's another step that I can achieve in my 
career."

After celebrating her victory the previous night with a few "champagne 
showers" – "we have some videos of that" – Azarenka enjoyed some dancing, her 
only disappointment that she did not find some karaoke.

Her on-court persona – pumped up and focused with a hint of arrogance – is a 
long way from her personality away from the court. Relaxing in a green skirt, 
horizontal-striped sailor top and platform shoes that made her even more 
imposing than her actual height of 6ft, Azarenka was engaging and thoughtful, 
assured but not cocky.

Unlike the emergence of the Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova, whom Azarenka 
expects to be one of her main rivals in the coming years, the Belarussian's 
rise to the top has been steady. Like so many players from the former Soviet 
Union, she believes that only by going through tough times can you truly 
appreciate the good ones.

"I think that's inside us, that mentality," she said. "I didn't really catch 
those hard years when the USSR was breaking up but I kind of have an idea. My 
parents worked so hard for me to have a chance to be a tennis player that I can 
never thank them enough. I think all the experiences before help me to be where 
I am. You have to go through some rough moments, some tough losses."

A year ago Azarenka contemplated giving it all up, unclear whether the grind 
was really worth it. Her mother and grandmother talked her out of it and on 
Sunday she laughed when asked what else she would have done.

"God, I don't know – maybe I would like to try acting," she said. "I would 
love to do that one day definitely after my career. I think it's very 
interesting."

The next chance to win another grand slam will come at the French Open in May 
before she arrives at Wimbledon, where she lost to Kvitova in the semi-finals 
last year. "I love playing at Wimbledon, I think it's amazing," she said. "The 
centre court is one of the most beautiful venues there is. It's very special, 
the whole walk through and the old tradition, how you can never pass anywhere 
without your badge. If you forget, you're so screwed."

But what about the thorny issue of grunting? The 22-year-old is well used to 
batting away questions about whether her high-pitched shriek is fair but she 
has a sense of humour about it, too. Coming across the sports section of the 
Melbourne Age newspaper from the day of the final, she held it up to show her 
agent. "Look," she said. "'The Silent Battle'. Ironic, huh?"
 