
The sentiment rolling over the Rod Laver Arena was so with Li Na it threatened 
to drown the champion,Victoria Azarenka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka>, in righteousness. The 
crowd, the American and Australian TV networks – the ballkids too probably – 
everyone wanted the charming Chinese player to win the Australian Open, to beat 
thevilain du jour who had hustled the sweet American teenage prodigy Sloane 
Stephens out of the semi-finals with her blatant gamesmanship.

Yet there was something heroic about Azarenka's achievement in retaining the 
title she won last year by slaying another golden girl, Maria Sharapova. This 
was a counter-intuitive twist that defied the power of the crowd, and one 
irreverently embroidered by her boyfriend, the wildly-coiffed American singer, 
Redfoo, who clutched the hand she reached up to him from the court in victory 
and uttered the heartfelt quote of the tournament: "I love you, baby – you're 
fucking amazing."

The microphones picked it up, and there was duly an apology to viewers. You 
are not supposed to use language like that here, not in tennis, not on 
Australia Day, even when wrecking a fairytale. That Roger Federer had used 
similar language the previous night in his match with Andy Murray did not get 
much of an airing.

If the night had gone to script, Azarenka, although No1 in the world, would 
not have beaten the sixth seed 4-6, 6-4, 6-3 in two hours and 40 minutes of 
flawed, eventful tennis. The storyboard would have had Li getting up from a 
spill that wrenched her left ankle to blast the wicked witch off the court. It 
would then have her return from the quite preposterous Australia Day 10-minute 
fireworks break, tumble on the ankle again, bang her head and hang on in the 
third set for a heartwarming win.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> in China would then have 
roared ahead of all the other sports scrambling for the biggest untapped 
audience in the world and they would make a movie of her life to go with the 
giant posters that already dot Shanghai and Beijing.

But this was real. And it was better than the pre-written script. Azarenka was 
better than Li, by a decent bit at the end. She served efficiently, at 78% on 
her first effort, to a poor 48% return for Li, whose unforced error count was 
catastrophic in the end: 57, with 30 on her backhand as her wrists failed to 
roll tough enough through the shot.

Azarenka sobbed uncontrollably into her towel at the end, wobbled over to her 
coach, Samuel Sumyk, who said: "You're a champion", a more decorous acclamation 
than that of Redfoo. He grew up in posh Pacific Palisades in Los Angeles but 
comes from no-nonsense stock, the son of Tamla Motown founder, Berry Gordy Jnr. 
Vika has interesting potential in-laws, as Gordy, a would-be boxer until he 
found music easier, is distantly related to Jimmy Carter, through the former US 
president's mother, Bessie Lillian Gordy. Had he been court-side, he could have 
serenaded her through her lachrymose celebrations with one of his great hits, 
Lonely Teardrops.

And she was all alone here, apart from those close friends. It was an unseemly 
spectacle, seeing the crowd cheer Azarenka's every mistake. Yes, as she 
admitted, "it was my bad" that she had taken a spectacularly ill-judged medical 
timeout against Stephens. But that was not good enough. "I was expecting way 
worse – but I thoughtLi Na <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/li-na> played 
some great tennis," she said.

Azarenka fought so hard to survive in the first set, saving four set points, 
before throwing it away with a double fault, and the expulsion of joy in the 
arena was a communal snarl in her direction. It must have taken all her 
fortitude to ignore it – and she is not known for that quality.

To that point, it was a final of emotion and ill-discipline, with seven 
service breaks in the first 10 games. Another followed at the start of the 
second, giving Azarenka rare breathing space under intense pressure.

She fought against her instincts to ignore the welter of distractions that 
followed. Li played her part, smiling through serial bouts of adversity. In 
between there was some tennis, some of it not bad.
 