
If Victoria Azarenka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoria-azarenka> is 
nervous about appearing in her first grand slam final here on Saturday, she is 
doing a pretty good job of hiding it. Her match with Maria Sharapova is no 
contest in terms of experience – the Russian won Wimbledon as a 17-year-old and 
has added two more grand slam titles since – but Azarenka is a confident young 
woman who believes she is ready to break through. And that is half the battle.

"I have worked hard to be in this situation, so why stress about it?," she 
said on Friday. "I want it and that's what I'm looking for so I'm just going to 
go out there and try to do my best."

It is an attitude that bodes well for the biggest match of her career. As 
recently as a year ago, the Belarussian was prone to losing her rag on court 
and occasionally behaving like a prima donna off it. Now, she is learning to 
relax and the results are coming. After her hard-earned three-set victory over 
the defending champion Kim Clijsters in the semi-final, she joked with the 
crowd that most of them "probably thought she was a mental case".

"I had, how you call that, meltdowns?" she said. "For sure, you can see some 
on YouTube. But I am growing as a player, I am growing as a person, and I am 
trying to learn from my mistakes and make it better. I'm proud of what I'm 
doing. I just want to keep going and keep raising that level."

The signs were there when in October she reached the final of the WTA Tour 
finals in Istanbul. Then she was blown off court by the Wimbledon champion, 
Petra Kvitova. But here she has looked even more confident and her victory over 
Clijsters was perhaps the most impressive of her life, considering the 
circumstances.

Having beaten Sharapova, 24, three times out of six, she knows she has the 
ability. Doing it in a grand slam final, with the added pressure of the No1 
ranking as a prize, is another pressure altogether but refreshingly, Azarenka, 
22, seems ready to embrace the experience. "In finals anything can happen," she 
said. "It's a battle for giving your all and how well you can manage it. Of 
course I know Maria's game, she knows my game. She's a great player. But it's 
going to be a different match; a whole different approach."

In pure tennis terms, Azarenka has it all. A good serve is backed up by 
powerful, consistent groundstrokes and her movement is superior to that of the 
taller Sharapova. An emphasis on the physical side of the game in the past year 
or two is paying dividends – now it's about proving it on the day against one 
of the best competitors in the game.

There is no getting away from the fact that the final is not going to be 
quiet. Azarenka and Sharapova are the "scream queens", their decibel levels on 
court approaching the 100 mark. It does not go down well with the crowd, which 
has mimicked Azarenka in the tournament.

While Sharapova's grunt is more of a scream, Azarenka's is a longer, 
high-pitched squeal that has been likened to the air being removed from a 
balloon. The local broadcaster, Channel 7, has a "gruntometer" to measure the 
sounds and she has been asked about it at almost every press conference.

"I guess some people are just bored," she said. "They created that machine 
that can measure it. So money well spent, huh?" But what does it feel like on 
the other side of the net, when Sharapova cranks up the volume? "Well, I'm not 
deaf," she said. "Of course I hear her. I'm sure she hears me. And about 
another 15,000 people hear us maybe even further away. But it doesn't bother 
me."The women's authorities have promised to look into reducing grunting in the 
sport but if Azarenka wins the title here on Saturday, nothing will bother her.
 