
Kate Battista was gardening out back when she heard the telephone ring. She 
sighed heavily, knowing it could only be her father demanding that she drop 
everything she was doing and bring the sandwich he had forgotten that morning 
to his laboratory across town.

“Sure Dad,” she said, not thinking to suggest he just went out to a cafe and 
buy one for himself. For a supposedly intelligent and independent 29-year-old 
woman, Kate was capable of acts of extraordinary stupidity. Still, this wasn’t 
the time to get hung up on minor points of feminism or plot coherence, so she 
willingly surrendered to the two-hour trudge. It wasn’t as if she had anything 
better to do. Apart from her job, of course.

“This sandwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/21/nasa-space-sandwich-gemini-corned-beef-astronauts>
 has gone a bit stale so I’ll pass,” said her father. “By the way, my research 
into autoimmune disorders appears to be going nowhere so my assistant Pyoder 
Cherbakov...” “It’s Pyotr,” said Pyotr.

“Pyoder is likely to be deported as his visa runs out next month. So I was 
wondering if you would be prepared to marry him so he can stay in the US?” Kate 
thought carefully about this before deciding, on balance, this wasn’t something 
she was happy to do. “Maybe Pyoder could marry your sister, Bunny, instead,” 
her father said. “But Bunny is only 15.” “She is an airhead, though.”

Kate left to go to the school where she worked as a teaching assistant. “I’m 
sorry I’m late, but I had to take my dad a sandwich,” she explained to a very 
angry Mrs Darling, the headteacher. “You’ve got to stop being so 
strong-willed,” said Mrs Darling. “Some of the parents have complained that you 
haven’t told their children they are geniuses. That’s got to stop.” “Yes, Mrs 
Darling.”

Kate went home to prepare dinner for Bunny and her father. Though Bunny was 
extremely dim, she was quite pretty and had attracted the attention of Eddie, 
the 20-year-old next-door neighbour. Kate wondered if any man would ever fancy 
her. After dinner, Kate’s father took her to one side and explained that her 
mother had suffered frompostnatal depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/postnatal-depression> for 14 years and the 
moment she had recovered she had dropped down dead with a heart defect caused 
by Bunny’s birth.

“I wondered why she hadn’t been around much lately,” said Kate. “That changes 
everything. Maybe I will marry Pyotr for you, after all.” So Pyotr and Kate 
went on a date. “Isn’t this the point at which we are supposed to engage in 
thrilling comic banter?” said Pyotr. “I suppose so,” said Kate. “But I can’t 
think of anything interesting or comedic to say. Though now you mention it, you 
can be a bit controlling and sexist.” “And you are a bit of a shrew!” “Don’t 
think you are going to tame me!”

Kate was unexpectedly excited on her wedding day and was a bit disappointed 
that Pyotr hadn’t shown up at the church on time. “Where’s Pyoder?” her father 
asked. “That joke wasn’t funny the first time,” she said. “In which case it 
should be right at home here,” he replied.

Just then, Kate received a text from Pyotr. “I’m on my way. There’s been an 
emergency.” Then, when he arrived, he said: “Let’s get this over with. We have 
to get back to the lab as soon as possible.” This wasn’t quite the wedding she 
had imagined but there was something surprisingly attractive about Pyotr when 
he was this assertive.

“Bunny let out all the mice,” Pyotr said. “All our research is ruined.” “I 
didn’t, I promise,” wept Bunny. “In which case it must have been Eddie. He’s a
vegan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/18/felicity-cloake-my-week-as-a-vegan>
.” “OK, OK, it was me,” Eddie said. “But the mice are all safe so you can go 
back to your wedding party.”

As they danced together, Pyotr told Kate that it hadn’t been easy for him 
having been brought up as an orphan and coming to America not knowing anyone, 
and that if he had behaved a bit awkwardly at times it was because he was a bit 
shy and didn’t understand American customs. “That’s OK,” Kate announced to the 
entire wedding party. “It must be difficult being a man these days when you 
aren’t allowed to express your feelings properly. I really respect Pyotr’s 
attempts to become emotionally literate.”

Everyone applauded wildly and even Bunny seemed quite pleased. “Kiss me Kate,” 
said Pyotr. So she did.

Epilogue: They had a son called Louie, Kate won a gardening prize and they all 
lived happily ever after.

Digested read, digested: The laming of the shrew.

 