
It’s a festival for the Instagram generation when Sydney lights up during the 
Vivid festival <http://www.vividsydney.com.au>. Just add a filter and watch the 
likes flow in.

Each year Vivid grows and it’s now billed as the world’s largest festival of 
light, music and ideas. But the perennial faviourites are seeing Customs House 
and the sails of the Opera House lit up with moving images and panels of light.

Guardian Australia spoke to contributing artist and light worker Iain Reed.

His company, 32 Hundred Lighting, is this year lighting up the western facade 
of the Harbour Bridge, Martin Place, the Cenotaph and about 20 vessels in 
Sydney Harbour.

His team have divided the harbour up into a series of colour squares. When the 
vessels travel through certain points in the harbour, geopositioning via 
satellites send signals back to hardware set up by the team and the boats 
change colour accordingly.

“At Circular Quay they are lavender then they change to red,” Reed says. “We 
pre-program them for when they are in the harbour and they change colour 
depending of where they are.”

Even the cranes operating at Darling Harbour have been lit up by Reed and his 
team.

“Vivid is a great winter activity. Sydney is usually dead from Anzac Day to 
City2Surf but this has brought people out of their houses and brought people 
together.”

Festival organisers recommend coming down earlier in the week to see the 
lights on Circular Quay, Martin Place and Darling Harbour. On weekend nights, 
expect big crowds.


Our top picks for places to see the lights
 An enchanted forest at Vivid 
From the deck of a ferry

Iain Reed reckons you get a great views from a Darling Harbour ferry. They 
leave regularly from Circular Quay. The Manly and Rose Bay ferries also offer 
up-close views of the lights on the Opera House.

Reed also recommends catching the lights from Dawes Point, and near the Museum 
of Contemporary Art at the Overseas Passenger Terminal. If there are no cruise 
ships docked, you can get a clear view of the Opera House on one side and the 
MCA on the other.

With a drink in your hand

Located at the edge of the Rocks at 176 Cumberland Street 
<http://www.shangri-la.com/>, for the price of a cocktail or soft drink at the 
Altitude bar, you are treated to a bird’s eye view of the lights on the harbour 
and around the quay. A brilliant view can also be had atO Bar 
<http://www.obardining.com.au/>, on George Street: 47 floors above street level 
you can take in not only the lights of the Opera House and the bridge but also 
across to Darling Harbour and beyond. Even better, the bar rotates, so there 
are no dud seats.


At the Opera House

You’ll be able to get some great pictures of the bridge from the Opera House 
forecourt. We also recommend the almost secret spot of theDeep Purple Pool Hall 
<http://vividlive.sydneyoperahouse.com/deep-purple-pool-hall/> in the Opera 
House Concert Hall’s northern foyer. It looks out over the harbour, a rarely 
used (and accessible space). Here, you’ve got an excellent view of the Harbour 
Bridge and across to the MCA.

According to our contact at Destination NSW: “You can’t see the Opera House 
from inside it, but it’s a pleasant little walk under the lights of the sails 
to get up there.”

End of pier four and five at Hickson Road, Walsh Bay

A short walk through the Rocks to Hickson Road will bring you to the Sydney 
Theatre precinct. As well as being a lovely place for a drink (we recommend The 
Bar at the End of the Wharf) you can see a stunning view of the Harbour Bridge.
 Customs House becomes a fantasy land 
Cahill Expressway walkway


My Guardian Australia colleague Nick Evershed reckons the best view of Vivid 
is on the walkway of the Cahill Expressway. You can (safely) access the walkway 
by alighting from Circular Quay station and getting the lift or stairs up from 
the platforms.

• Vivid Sydney hosts 150 Ideas events and more than 90 music performances take 
place around the city. It’s all free and runs until 8 June.
 