 Photograph: Guardian 
David Rivers, BA in journalism, Southampton Solent University

"Since I started university two years ago I've been also been working two jobs 
– one at a supermarket and the other at a bar. For me, the key is doing all my 
shifts on Fridays and Saturdays, so the week is free for study and I still earn 
a good wage. I don't feel I miss out on anything because most students don't go 
out at the weekend – far too expensive!"
 Photograph: Guardian 
Paul Holmes, BA in journalism and broadcasting, University of Salford

"As a mature student with experience in retail management, it was quite easy 
for me to find work at university. I work for a mobile phone network. My 
managers are very accommodating and don't mind rearranging my shifts when my 
timetable changes. The only downside I've found to working part time is that it 
makes it difficult to fit in unpaid work placements."
 Photograph: Sam Atkins for the Guardian 
Katie Rhodes, BA in history, University of York 

"In the second year I got a transfer from the Tesco branch at home to one 
close to university. There were lots of students working there, and the 
management were great about us fitting work around our timetables and holidays. 
In the third year, I was able to cut the shifts down and then increase them 
again after my exams.
 Photograph: Zak Waters 
Cameron Ross, BSc product design, London South Bank University 

"I applied to work for the university on events as soon as I enrolled at 
college. I'm never under an obligation to work if I don't have the time, but I 
can assist on open days when they fit around my timetable.
 Photograph: Guardian 
Jack Knight, MA international relations, University of Sheffield

"During my undergraduate degree I worked for a busy travel agent who organised 
events for corporate clients. It was quite a high-pressure working culture, but 
it helped me stay on-track. If you only spend time with other students, you can 
start to lose your focus. Being in a work environment helped me maintain 
perspective."
 Photograph: Guardian 
Nicholas Dunn-McAfee, BA English and related literature, University of York 

"I work for a courier, handling customer complaints via email. The role is 
remote, so I can work shifts from anywhere. I can complete my set number of 
hours for a day at any time, so it fits easily around my degree. If it weren't 
for all the abusive emails I have to answer, it would be the perfect student 
job!"
 