
At Mr Chow, Beverly Hills, they don't like to give you a menu. "I could go 
down to the vault, see what I find," sniffs the waiter. He has the preppy 
perfectionism of a young Patrick Bateman. We let him choose what we'll eat. The 
foul-mouthed heir to a billion dollars of oil money sits at the table on our 
right. It's the birthday of a woman at the table on our left. But hard to guess 
which birthday. It could be anything between 40 and 80; her face is a rigid 
surgical mask: any expression not sliced away by the scalpel has been frozen 
with Botox. A late-night chat show host sits opposite. My friend tells me that 
on a celebrity scale of 1-10, this is a 2: in other words no Clooney, Cruise or 
Spielberg.

The waiter tells us he's bringing a Special Surprise. In the meantime it's 
show time. An older Chinese chef wheels a linen-clad trolley into the centre of 
the room and raises a huge mound of dough above his head. He stretches it, then 
slaps it off the table in a violent cloud of flour. He stretches it into a long 
sausage, doubles it and twirls it around like a lasso yo-yo. He repeats this 
until he has tangle of noodles held in the air to an explosion of applause. A 
couple of minutes later we're eating them. They're Mr Chow's special noodles 
with a meat sauce that tastes like bolognese laced with soy sauce. Then comes 
the Special Surprise. It's frogs' legs. They're battered and fried with chilli. 
They must have been muscular frogs, as there's lots of flesh on the greenish 
bones. What do frogs taste of? Well, these ones taste of chilli. The best thing 
we are brought is the duck, which is as soft and rich as molten chocolate. 
Everything tastes so good you can't tell what it is.

There's an air of indifference among the waiters. They tell you what you'll 
eat then don't give a toss whether you enjoy it or not. My friend is bemused: 
"People come here for status. The food's good, but this place tastes like death 
to me."

· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 