
Just because there's champagne and yachts and a bit of sunshine, everyone 
thinks Cannes must be brilliant. Most of the time, it is, but it certainly 
hasn't been this year and when the curtain comes down tonight on the 63rd 
edition of the world's most important film festival, everyone at the Palais 
will surely be glad to make way for next month's Congres des Parfumeurs. It 
should help dissipate the air of disappointment lingering in the screening 
theatres.

There. I've said it. After the early promise of Mike Leigh's tender character 
studyAnother Year, the Cannes line-up revealed very little new or inventive in 
world cinema. And there's nothing more depressing than watching half-arsed art 
house. I'd rather watch slick Hollywood "product" than sit through most of this 
year's Cannes films again, when and if they eventually turn up, briefly, at a 
boutique cinema somewhere miles away from most of you, sometime over the next 
12 months.

Why have so many of the films, as a group, angered me so? Because at their 
worst, they have been indulgent and self-important, arrogant and elitist and, 
for the most part, preaching tired western ideologies through a creaking 
medium. What I have witnessed in 12 days here is film-makers trying to 
understand the modern world – financial crisis, Iraq, terrorism, Palestine, 
immigration – but with very little subtlety or success. If I ran an art-house 
cinema, I'd quickly be doing two-for-one on the carrot cake because lord only 
knows what else will get people into theatres over the next year – most of 
these Cannes films have neither the skills nor the inclination to appeal to an 
audience. A good Cannes needs a few "buzz" films in the competition to energise 
the Croisette. Last year hadA Prophet and The White Ribbon, the year before 
hummed withGomorrah and The Class, and prior to them there was, for example, 
Anton Corbijn'sControl. These films sustained interest in bold, classy 
film-making throughout the following year, all the way up to the Baftas and 
Oscars. There's been nothing nearly so exciting to grab hold of this year.

Many people are touting Xavier Beauvois's Of Gods and Men as a Palme d'Or 
winner. It's about nine Cistercian monks in a monastery besieged by the threat 
of Islamic extremists in Algeria. They wait for God to save them. It's good and 
audience patience may be rewarded with a couple of final scenes that strive for 
transcendence, but ultimately, it's a film about nine old monks and I think 
that's a tough sell.

Set in a grim-looking Barcelona, Alejandro González Iñáritu's Biutiful was a 
hot ticket, a big art-house number starringJavier Bardem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/javierbardem>, by the director of Amores 
Perros and 21 Grams. Bardem plays a cancer-ridden lowlife dealing with 
Senegalese street pedlars, Chinese sweatshop managers and corrupt construction 
site foremen. But he's also got this gift of speaking in whispers to dead 
people, so we're supposed to feel for him as he bleeds physically and 
spiritually. It's irritating nonsense from the off, pompous and whingey, and 
Bardem, sporting a silly ponytail, looks like a baleful puppy throughout. I 
used to like him, but he needs to stop with the wigs.

The hairstylists were busy on Carlos, the most expensive TV movie France has 
ever made, directed by the urbane Olivier Assayas and premiering in an 
enjoyable five-and-a-half hour chunk here, although out of competition. It's 
the story of the terrorist currently imprisoned in France and suspected of 
masterminding bombings and assassinations throughout the 1970s and 80s.

What is it about outlaw rebels that requires episodic movie marathons? Modern 
directors daren't take a firm moral view of these "baddies". We had it withChe 
andMesrine and now Assayas takes the best elements of both those works, slaps 
on some good music, and hops from Paris to London, the Hague, Beirut, Sudan, 
Tripoli, Budapest and Frankfurt. I know why international terrorists aren't 
what they used to be – they're saving the air miles for a happy retirement.

I have a vision of them, in some spa complex off the M6, sharing the solarium 
with retired CIA agents. Boy, do they get through some speedy boarding, at 
least if Naomi Watts inFair Game is anything to go by. Directed and shot by 
Doug Liman (Swingers, Jumper), this was the story of outed operative Valerie 
Plame-Wilson, whose husband Joe (played with a horrible strutting smugness by
Sean Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/seanpenn> in a cream polo neck) 
revealed there weren't any WMDs when the Bush administration invaded Iraq. 
Watts is sadly anodyne in it, doing lots of kissing her kids on the head and 
rushing out the door with carry-on luggage, and the film is weedy liberal 
propaganda that feels and looks very last decade.

The real Plame-Wilson was in Cannes to promote Countdown to Zero, the urgent 
call to (dis)arms by British doc maker Lucy Walker, a film that made me sweat 
about the bag left on the seat next to me. Turns out a Spanish bloke had just 
gone for a lengthy toilet break, but the film is a clear-sighted, logically 
argued illustration of where we're at with nuclear bombs. Of 23,000 still 
remaining, many may be in the hands of terrorists or unstable regimes and you 
can pick one up in the former Soviet republics for peanuts. Walker rightly 
berates the world's politicians for not reducing their number to zero.

If you want righteous anger, firebrand Ken Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach> was back in Cannes with Route Irish
, addressing the festering canker that is the Iraq war. He deals with mercenary 
soldiers working for private military contractors on the world's most dangerous 
road, between Baghdad airport and the green zone.

Shooting with his old cameraman, Chris Menges, Loach delivered an urgent, 
political story of a soldier (Mark Womack) back in Liverpool, investigating the 
covered-up death of his best mate (John Bishop) while on duty in Iraq. Alas, 
the film becomes over-schematic, cramming too much in – Iraqi musicians, 
profiteering contractors, grieving lovers, vengeful soldiers, a torture scene. 
Perhaps the great director is actually too upset to focus his story on the 
human fallout of a dreadful war making monsters of us all.

Only two films, I felt, really challenged reality and perception. They 
questioned the nature of film and cinema itself. Abbas Kiarostami'sCertified 
Copy is my favourite kind of movie: people walking around a nice place, talking 
about love. This is Rohmer/Linklater/Allen territory and certainly unusual for 
this Iranian director, whose signature is filming conversations in moving cars. 
It starred the luminous Juliette Binoche as a gallery owner in Tuscany who goes 
to a lecture by a distinguished English author (William Shimell, an experienced 
opera singer acting in his first film, where his inexperience shows) about the 
difference between fakes and originals.

After a drive, the pair then stroll around a pretty village and pretend to be 
a married couple, falling into arguments and regrets before returning to 
playfulness. Dubbed by some wag asBefore Sunrise for Lacanian PhD students (a 
semantic comedy?), it's strangely sensual but also intellectually spry and 
gripping, largely due to Binoche's bravura display of acting skills, from 
crying single tears to flirting and giggling to putting on her make-up, using 
the camera as a compact.

The real gem wasn't in competition but in the more experimental (and this 
year, dull) Un Certain Regard selection and it came from the grand master of 
the filmic game,Jean-Luc Godard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeanlucgodard>
, or JLG as he's now known, like some kind of perfume (a whiff of bitterness, 
with top notes of genius).

Helped with production by fashionista Agnes B and using words ("textos") 
credited to J Derrida, W Benjamin, S Beckett and W Shakespeare, among others, 
79-year-old JLG's avowed final workFilm Socialisme was the freshest, coolest 
thing I saw, bursting with a new wave of anger and vitality, retooling once 
again the visual language of cinema.

Shot in astounding, crisp HD, it's a fragmented collage of ideas and thoughts, 
beautifully pure graphics, scratched Dolby sounds and twisted images. He even 
plays with the convention of subtitles, merely placing English words along the 
bottom of the frame: "smile dismiss universe" or "destructive constructive". At 
one point, a girl at a petrol station refuses "to talk to anyone who uses the 
verb to be". Then a llama appears behind her. You want story? Forget it, but 
there's plenty of meaning here as Godard swipes at European history, Palestine, 
Jews, bankers and the futility of language and the strictures of time. As the 
final credits simply say: NO COMMENT – and the old man didn't show up for his 
Cannes press conference.

Who will win tonight? Most unusually, I can't call it and am unsure as to what 
might have grabbed the attention of jury president Tim Burton, who said he was 
looking for a film that would "surprise" him. It might just be the Thai film
Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, which is weird and funny and 
spiritual and whimsical. It has a dying man's lost son turn up in the form of a 
large, red-eyed monkey and features an ageing princess having sex with a 
talking catfish. Yes, I'll go for that but I doubt many audiences will, at 
least not without major hallucinogenics.

It's a shame Stephen Frears's comedy about modern rural life, Tamara Drewe, 
was obviously deemed too much fun to play in competition. Everyone seemed to 
enjoy its smart pacing and spot-on comic performances. Its country setting also 
allows me to rehearse a favourite old gag: In Dorset? Yes, I thoroughly 
recommend it.

With Frears and Mike Leigh and Abbas Kiarostami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/abbas-kiarostami> and JLG all somewhere near 
the top of their games, the veterans really showed this year's young 
pretenders. They need to find their form soon – and, promisingly, I hear Venice 
is shaping up nicely for September. Vive le cinema!
 