
Wal-Mart, the world's largest retailer, signaled its intent yesterday to set 
up superstores inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> by signing a 
deal with the farms-and-phones empire of the billionaire Sunil Mittal.

The American giant beat off competition from Britain's Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> and Carrefour of France. 
Wal-Mart's expertise in running a sophisticated $1.6bn (£830m) sourcing 
operation in India landed the contract.

Mr Mittal, whose Bharti Enterprises runs India's biggest private telecoms 
firm, told reporters: "The shops will be owned by Bharti Enterprises under the 
Wal-Mart franchise. The idea is to give Indians the lowest price every day."

The company aimed to have "as many stores as we can in the next few years, and 
the investment will be large". He hoped to open the first next August.

Although no financial details were released, media reports say the joint 
venture will begin with an initial investment of $200m, rising to $1.5bn over 
the next few years. Analysts say the deal allows Bharti - whose joint venture 
with the Rothschild group, FieldFresh, exports fresh produce - to access 
Wal-Mart's expertise in sourcing goods as well as its successful Sam's Club 
cash-and-carry format.

"Under the existing laws in India, foreign companies can set up cash-and-carry 
wholesale stores. That's what Sam's Club does in America and Bharti can do the 
same here," said Arvind Singhal of KSA Technopak, a retail consultancy.

Despite its size, India's retail market is dominated by small, family-run 
neighbourhood shops. A mere 3% of it could currently be classed as "organised 
retail" and that tiny sliver contains only three large players - Pantaloon 
Retail, Shoppers' Stop, and Tata Group's Trent.

There are signs of big changes. Shoppers' Stop opened India's first 
western-style superstore, Hypercity, in Mumbai this year, selling Waitrose 
products. India's biggest company, Reliance Industries, a petrochemical and 
refining firm, has launched its first grocery in the southern city of Hyderabad 
as part of its $5.6bn retail plan that includes hypermarkets, malls and 
groceries on petrol forecourts.

Mr Singhal said the Indian retail market would be worth $427bn by 2010, up 
from today's $300bn. "By December 2007 we will have 250 [superstores] in India. 
We think there are seven big players who will put in the bulk of the planned 
$24bn investment in the next few years. Reliance is there, but so is Bharti and 
Wal-Mart."

The planned expansion is expected to create more than 3m jobs.
 