
Good old economic downturn. Marta Cabral, of non-profit organisation Casas 
Brancas, is in some ways grateful for the financial crisis. She had been 
working on a new walking route in south-west Portugal, the Rota Vicentina, 
which follows the Atlantic for 110km along the wildest, most unspoilt coastline 
in southern Europe. One thing that stood in her way was the fact that stretches 
of beautiful coast are also attractive to property developers.

But the world economy caught a cold and the euro took to its bed. Plans for an 
oceanside golf course were torn up; a projected large-scale, village-style 
resort up the coast was never started.

Such development would have brought money to the Alentejo, the poorest region 
of one of western Europe's poorest countries, but its postponement gave the 
Rota Vicentina a little breathing space: to get paths and waymarking laid, GPS 
coordinates online, and rural hotels, restaurants and activity providers 
convinced that smaller-scale, sustainable tourism offers a future.

The whole Rota Vicentina is now – just – open, but my husband and I had a 
brief preview of its two sections last summer. The Historical Way starts at 
Cabo de São Vicente, in the far south and winds its way through cork forests 
and high hills to the ancient town of Santiago do Cacém. But we started in 
Brejão, 2½ hours south of Lisbon, to try the Fishermen's Trail, which splits 
off at the little town of Odeceixe to follow 75km of coastal paths long used by 
locals to reach good fishing (and smuggling) spots.

The roads from the airport were smooth and empty, and we were feeling mellow 
when we arrived at Casa da Seiceira, just outside Brejão. This charmingturismo 
rural has rooms in low, blue-and-white buildings round a swimming pool. There 
were hammocks and deckchairs, and a pond with a weeping willow on a little 
island reached by a bridge.
 Guest sitting room at Casa Seicera. 
Marta is glad locals have come on board, but they must have taken some 
persuading. Antonio, owner of Casa da Seiceira, was helpful and welcoming, but 
did regard us with vague wonder – or was it pity? This, we learned, was because 
in these parts walking for the sake of walking seems strange. Especially on 
holiday. Traditionally, you only walked if you couldn't afford a mule, never 
mind a car. So what's with these comfortably-off Brits and Germans, tramping 
around with boots, maps and rucksacks?

But the kindly Alentejanos seem to have decided that if these weirdos are set 
on choosing feet over wheels, the least they can do is make sure we are 
well-fed. Dinner at Casa da Seiceira was a banquet of local cheese and ham, 
freshly caught fish, veg and salads; breakfast was fruit, more cheese and 
gorgeous sourdough bread with jam. And, before we left, they staggered out with 
a gargantuan packed lunch for us.

It looked like a lot to carry, but my comment that we could pick up something 
on the way showed my ignorance of this sparsely populated region. There'd be no 
food or drink between here and our next stop – 18km away near Odeceixe.

A short walk away we hit the Fishermen's Trail. Putting the Atlantic on our 
right, we turned south on a secluded path. There is something about being on 
the outer reaches of Europe that you don't get on the Med, or in much of 
Britain – a wildness, a feeling of life on the edge. The ocean looked calm, but 
at our feet, Atlantic rollers were pounding in, and a breeze took the edge off 
the hot sun.

The trail, at times steep and rocky, is magnificent. Paths down ravines 
revealed deserted sandy coves; each headland climbed brought a further vista of 
cliffs and stacks, home to raggedy storks' nests. And lunchtime brought two 
ravenous people, glad to dive into their picnic. The clifftops we tramped after 
lunch held such a profusion of flowers they could have been a well-tended 
garden rather than a remote shore.

The Portuguese do enjoy seaside, but they come en masse to resorts such as 
Praia de Odeceixe in August, when the wind keeps temperatures in the high 20s, 
rather than the 40C found inland. We peered down at this wide beach with its 
lazy river: it was mid-June, yet there were maybe two families on the sand, and 
a few surfers. At the foot of the cliff a British couple – campervan, 
surfboards, Kindles – had an idyllic riverside spot to themselves.
 Praia de Odeceixe 
At our next stop, Monte do João Roupeiro <http://www.joao-roupeiro.com/http://>
, 3km from Odeceixe, the owners also thought walkers must be on the brink of 
starvation. At dinner, starters of sliced tomatoes and cheese, and cold octopus 
salad with parsley were followed by fish with two sorts of potatoes, carrots 
and beans, a huge salad, melon and delicious sweet potato and coconut cake. 
Phew!

Come morning we shouldered a possibly even bigger picnic, and hit the 
historical trail towards São Teotónio. We had thought nothing could match the 
ocean walk, but were soon among majestic hills, rushing rivers with stepping 
stones, and vast forests.

A day later, walking with Balthasar Trueb of turismo rural Tres Marias 
<http://www.casasbrancas.pt/index.php?option=com_hotproperty&task=view&id=9&Itemid=30>
 near Vila Nova de Milfontes, we learned that 21st-century developers are but 
the latest in a long line of people exploiting south-west Portugal's natural 
assets. On his favourite stretch of the route, Balthasar picked up a strange 
bulbous black stone and handed it to me. "Ancient slag," he said. He wasn't 
being rude about my age or morals, but explaining that this was a by-product of 
iron ore smelted here 2,000 years ago for sale to ancient Rome.

This was also our favourite stretch: a secret valley alive with butterflies 
led to the Rocha de Agua d'Alte, an impressive waterfall from October to May, 
but a trickle in June. Balthasar told us of wild camping trips here with his 
children – tent beneath cliffs, swimming in clear pools.

There are still mines in the Alentejo, but on a crowded continent, its most 
valuable resource is probably its open spaces – mountains and valleys, forests 
and beaches. And unlike with mining or property development, exploiting the 
riches of the Rota Vicentina will help preserve the area, keeping small hotels 
open and bringing income to local producers. Best of all, you don't need to be 
a tycoon to do it: rooms in rural hotels are astoundingly affordable, and more 
food than you can eat costs a lot less than you'd think.

And if lots of us go, maybe the locals will realise we're not actually mad.
 