
What have you been growing to eat this year? Asparagus, rainbow chard, purple 
sprouting broccoli ... or maybe, sausages? New grow-your-own schemes or 
so-called animal allotments are aimed at people who don’t have the space to 
rear their own meat.

The schemes mean that people can keep animals – usually pigs – away from their 
own homes, on farms and smallholdings, while still being able to feed and care 
for them and ensure they have a high standard of welfare.

“You can’t just stick a pig in your back garden or on a vegetable allotment,” 
says Alison Wynne, who ownsWild Meadow <http://wildmeadowltd.co.uk/>, a 
smallholding in East Oxfordshire. “There’s bureaucracy involved; you have to 
register with the council, for example, and you need a fair bit of space. This 
is an easier, accessible way for people to grow their own meat in a way that 
allotments are for growing vegetables.”

The idea is that you can buy an animal – usually from the farmer or 
smallholding owner where he or she will be kept – and you then pay for 
associated costs: including being allowed to keep it on the land, its 
healthcare and its slaughter.

The grow-your-own schemes are attracting people who are concerned about 
welfare issues and who want a high quality of meat. Wynne says the schemes are 
often popular with families, as parents think it helps children understand 
where their food is coming from.

Educating children


Wynne says: “We have lots of children who come to see the animals and when 
we’re talking to them about how to look after them, we tell them that the pigs 
are going to be turned into sausages. It’s not about pretending that they’re 
pets.”

This is a concept that most children are able to deal with, says Wynne, 
particularly when they can see how well the animals are looked after.

She says: “The children in my own family are really into it too. For example, 
my nephew is about to get another pig as part of the scheme. He looks after 
each one, and then he sells the meat to his teachers. He does get a bit 
attached to the animals but he knows they’ve had a good life and he enjoys the 
sausages.”

Some schemes, including Wynne’s, allow you to bring your own food for feed – 
surplus vegetables, for example – though she carefully checks it before it’s 
allowed to be given to the animals. Others, such as a scheme onYonderton Farm 
<http://yonderton.com>, in Lanark, Scotland, let you feed the animals with food 
they’ve already got on the farm. If you are unable to visit and look after your 
pig, the Yonderton Farm scheme sends you regular updates, photos and video 
links. It will also dispatch the meat, by overnight courier to anywhere in the 
UK.

Better life – better taste


The grow-your-own meat schemes are a natural extension of growing vegetables 
on an allotment, according to David Williams, 56, who lives in Oxfordshire. He 
is about to buy a new piglet, which he’ll keep it at Wild Meadow, and he was 
also part of the grow-your-own pork scheme last year.

He says: “I’m still eating my way through last year’s pig, which was 
slaughtered in November and it’s delicious. I wanted my own pig to have a 
better quality of meat than the products sold at the supermarket and at the 
butchers, but I didn’t have anywhere to keep it. So when I heard about this 
scheme, I thought I’d give it a go.

“It works well for me, as I also have a vegetable allotment. Now, when any 
vegetables have gone over, I feed them to my pig, which cuts down on food 
waste,” says Williams.

The grow-your-own schemes currently tend to revolve around pigs, though there 
are plans to include sheep and alpacas at Wild Meadow. The schemes cost 
£300-£350, depending on the breed of pig. You usually put down a deposit and 
then pay the full cost once the animal has been slaughtered and weighed.

More expensive breeds such as the KuneKune, which you can own via the scheme 
at Yonderton Farm, cost nearer the higher end of the scale because they take 
longer to reach their slaughter weight.

“We charge depending on the dead weight of the animal, so you’re never paying 
over the odds,” says Wynne: “You know it’s not been pumped full of water and 
you’ve been able to care and check the animal yourself,” says Wynne.

If you’re looking to purchase a whole pig in bulk, rather than do a 
grow-your-own scheme, you can buy directly from farms or on sites such asGreen 
Pasture Farms <http://www.greenpasturefarms.co.uk/>, where a box load of an 
entire pig costs from £250.

Once the animal is ready to be slaughtered, the schemes allow owners to 
specify which cuts of meat they want.

Usually, people want a mixture of joints and they clear out their freezer 
beforehand as most people aren’t used to squashing an entire animal in there.

“However, we had one customer who wanted the entire pig made into sausages,” 
says Wynne. “We’re talking a lot of sausages – you can get 80kg of sausages out 
of a large pig but the customers were barbeque fanatics.”

Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month’s Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

 