 Tony Blair's former science adviser today warns the government that new 
legislation on human tissue could cut off "vital avenues of research" and 
hamper the understanding of disease.
Lord May, speaking as president of the Royal Society, Britain's leading 
scientific academy, was for five years the government's chief scientific 
adviser. He and many others want to see urgent changes in the human tissue bill 
soon to come to the House of Lords.

The bill was drafted as a response to the scandals at Bristol royal infirmary 
and Alder Hey hospital in Liverpool, when children's organs were kept for 
research without parental consent. But many scientists believe that the 
legislation, even after many changes, could impose too much paperwork and 
smother important research.

"The scientific and medical communities have been making their concerns known 
since the start of this bill but the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> appears to be carrying on 
regardless," Lord May said. "The government must take action to ensure that 
these concerns are fully addressed."

He said the Royal Society wholeheartedly supported the aim of the bill, which 
was to increase public confidence in the collection and use of human tissue and 
organs. But the government was oversimplifying the issue and making the need 
for consent too broad.

"It's like using a sledgehammer to crack a nut," he said. "No distinction is 
made between tissue samples taken during routine diagnostic tests at one end of 
the scale and the removal of organs during post-mortem at the other.

"The prohibitive amount of bureaucracy that could be generated by the need to 
obtain consent for individual tissue samples would impact on teaching and lead 
to reduced levels of vital research into understanding diseases such as cancer, 
heart disease, Parkinson's and vCJD."

Since the birth of modern medicine, lecturers, students and researchers have 
depended on a supply of human tissue, for anatomy lessons, to study the action 
of an infection, and to test new treatments on cell cultures. Almost all 
biomedical breakthroughs have depended at some point on a close study of 
samples of human flesh and blood, preserved in laboratory collections.

Researchers need to be able to use samples again and again, to understand 
disease, to find new treatments, to launch investigations when research goes 
wrong and to open up avenues of study as medical technology advances.

Collections built up in British hospitals and laboratories so far will be 
exempted from the bill, but the government has promised that a human tissue 
authority will devise codes of practice for handling these, too. Lord May said 
this guidance could impose restrictions without any scrutiny by parliament. 
Researchers would have no chance to comment.

"It would be impractical and impossible to predict in advance all of the 
possible research uses for samples, as required under the current bill. The 
definition of consent needs to allow for the fact that the scope of research 
programmes inevitably changes over time."
 