
Shakespeare’s Sonnet 116, Let me not to the marriage of true minds, has of 
recent years become as popular a recitation at weddings as recitals of Frank 
Sinatra’s My Way at funerals.

If wide notice is taken of a current spat over what we can read about 
Shakespeare’s sexuality into the sonnets 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2851355/Was-Shakespeare-gay-Row-breaks-experts-playwright-lines-sonnets-reveal-sexuality.html>
 in the correspondence columns of the Times Literary Supplement,Sonnet 20 
<http://www.shakespeare-online.com/sonnets/20.html> may be a future favourite 
at civil unions. The opening line, to remind you, isA woman’s face with 
nature’s own hand painted / Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion.

And the end couplet is: But since she [Nature] prick’d thee out for women’s 
pleasure, / Mine be thy love and thy love’s use their treasure.

The two TLS spatters are Sir Brian Vickers, wholly sceptical, and Stanley 
Wells – inclined to read Shakespeare’s own gay feelings into the poems. 
Vickers’s countering line is that one should assume the poet is the “poet’s 
persona”, no more Shakespeare than Hamlet is Shakespeare. Wells thinks the 
sonneteer is, indeed, Shakespeare himselfin propria persona (this is, remember, 
the TLS, not saloon bar at the Dog and Duck).

These distinguished scholars’ interest in sex and the sonnets is, one may 
suspect, wholly academic. They are well into that stage of life in which 
Shakespeare says (rather unkindly) the “heyday in the blood is tame”. There is 
something rather touching about two greybeards, well into theirPolonius 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polonius> years with a combined age of 155, 
speculating about what was bubbling up in the Bard’s twentysomething gonads and 
whether it spurts into the poems.

Sonnets, one should note in passing, are hard to read – particularly as they 
move on to the “sestet”, or last six lines. They are also particularly hard to 
write in English. As George Orwell noted, the cross that English poets have to 
bear is too few rhyme words (how many for “love”? glove / dove / above – that’s 
it). There are infinitely more in Italian – the home of the sonnet.

Although it has supplied some “slow news day” fodder the 
Shakespeare-sex-and-sonnet issue is by no means new. Victorians were well aware 
of it; Oscar Wilde cited the sonnets in his doomed trial. It didn’t help.

“Sodometries” – particularly in Renaissance (now renamed Early Modern) 
literature – has been around as a critical approach ever since the rise of the 
queer theory in the 1970s. Shakespeare’s likely bisexuality has been factored, 
unexcitedly, into modern biography. In one of the best of the recent ones (
Shakespeare Unbound 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Shakespeare-Unbound-Decoding-Hidden-MacRae/dp/0805088652>
, 2007) René Weis has a cool and illuminatingly open-minded analysis of whether 
the earlier sonnets (including 20) are directed at the young and glamorous Earl 
of Southampton, the poet’s patron and possible love object. Weis also discusses 
whether, in their “madcap twenties”, Shakespeare and the more overtly gay 
Christopher Marlowe had an affair.

Was Shakespeare gay? Was he bisexual? Was he either or both of the above at 
different times of his life? Would he have divulged the fact? Buggery was 
punishable by hanging until 1861. And, the biggest question of all: does it 
matter?

I think it does because Shakespeare is a “living” author and how we read him 
affects how he is performed. Should one make Osric in Hamlet openly gay (and 
what about Rosenkrantz and Guildenstern)? Should a director accentuate a gay 
theme in The Merchant of Venice (Weis thinks yes), or in the transvestite 
subplot in Twelfth Night? Was Shakespeare bisexual? I’d risk Vickers’ wrath by 
thinking probably yes. Take another look at Sonnet 20.
 