
The Washington navy yard reopened on Thursday, three days after the mass 
shooting that left 13 people dead and eight more injured at the oldest military 
installation in the United States.

As employees returned to work for the first time since the shootings, more 
details emerged about the perpetrator's encounters with law enforcement 
agencies in recent years. None of the incidents appeared to have been serious 
enough to revoke the security clearances awarded toAaron Alexis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aaron-alexis>, 34, a former navy reservist 
who had returned to work for the military as a contractor.

Separately, Capitol police were investigating reports that a tactical unit, 
which was near the navy yard when the shootings began, on Monday, had been 
stood down.

As concern intensified over the state of Alexis's mental health and the ease 
with which he was able to acquire a shotgun, navy yard employees returned to 
their normal working patterns.

There was no additional security in place at the site, although several 
workers said Building 197, where the shootings took place, would not be open 
again for several weeks. "To me it is surprising how quickly everything seems 
to be returning to normal," said Brian Collins, 54, who works for the navy 
housing division.

"I wasn't here on the day but my co-workers said there was very little 
information on Monday, and no one really knew what was happening. They looked 
out the window and could see people running but nobody really knew what was 
going on," Collins said.

A woman who worked in the navy legal office said employees were told on 
Wednesday night they could return to work. "To be honest I think it is all 
quite soon, as I know co-workers who are pretty shook up. But I guess it shows 
a message that we're not going to be beaten by this kind of thing," she said.

On Thursday it emerged that US Capitol police had ordered an investigation 
into its response to the shooting. ABBC report 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/24153252> had suggested that a specially trained and 
equipped tactical response team were at the navy yard shortly after the 
shootings began, but were stood down by a supervisor.

The principal responsibility of the Capitol police is to guard the US Congress 
and its associated buildings, which are only a few miles from the navy yard. 
The Senate sergeant-at-arms, Terrance Gainer, told the Associated Press that it 
would be an "unbearable failure" if the BBC's reports were accurate. A local TV 
station, WUSA-9, said members of the Capitol police containment and emergency 
response team were "furious" and were "convinced they could have saved lives".

Meanwhile, police reports from Texas, obtained by the Guardian, showed that 
Aaron Alexis had been accused of tampering with the petrol tank of his former 
employer's car two months ago.

Alexis worked at the Happy Bowl Thai restaurant in Fort Worth on and off for 
three years before the shooting. The owner, Nutpisit Suthamtewakul,had told 
reporters 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/09/16/aaron-alexis-navy-yard-shooter/2822731/>
 that Alexis was his "best friend" and was the best man at his wedding. 
Suthamtewakul he and the former navy reservist had lived together for three 
years before Alexis moved out this summer after Suthamtewakul got married.

A Fort Worth police department report, released to the Guardian after a public 
information act request, shows that the relationship between the two men had 
soured.

According to the report, filed on 5 July, Suthamtewakul accused Alexis of 
putting an unknown substance in his car's gas tank in an attempt to damage the 
vehicle. Suthamtewakul said his car had begun "running very roughly" the day 
after an argument with Alexis. He noticed the car's fuel cap was damaged and 
there was a light coating of dust around the entrance to the fuel tank.

The report said that Suthamteakul and his wife made it clear that Alexis "will 
need to find somewhere else to live.". It said: "Another confrontation with 
[Alexis] had occurred on the previous day, with [Alexis] becoming increasingly 
hostile."

In a Texas report from June 2011, Suthamtewakul and Alexis are listed as 
witnesses to an assault on a woman said to be Alexis's girlfriend. A row had 
broke between Alexis and another man, Monty Peterson, after Peterson "took an 
aggressive stance" towards Sita Lammala, who had recently moved to the US.

Alexis punched Peterson in the face, according to the report, after Peterson 
swung at him. Peterson was issued a general complaint citation following the 
incident.

The incidents seem to match a pattern of aggressive behaviour in recent months 
and years. Alexis was arrested by police in Texas, in 2010, after he fired 
through the ceiling into his upstairs neighbour's apartment in an apparent 
dispute over noise. He was also detained in Seattle, in 2004, when he shot the 
tyres of a construction worker's car. Alexis said the worker had been mocking 
him. Neither incident led to charges.

More recently, Alexis had called police on 7 August in Rhode Island, where he 
had been hired as a naval contractor, and told officers he had got into an 
argument with a man who had subsequently sent three people to follow and harass 
him. Alexis told police that he changed hotels after hearing voices talking to 
him through a wall.

Defense secretary Chuck Hagel ordered two reviews of military security and 
employee screening programs following the shooting. Hagel said "a lot of red 
flags" may have been missed in background checks on Alexis, who bought a 
shotgun and ammunition from a store in Virginia 48 hours before the killing 
spree.
 