
Autumnwatch 2007
8pm, BBC2

Bill Oddie (beard), Kate Humble (teeth) and Simon King (binoculars/heptagonal 
skull) return with more sporadic badger action. With Oddie on 
passive-aggressive duties and King typically sequestered to some godless 
Hebridean outcrop, it will doubtless be left to Humble to decipher all the 
blurred garden footage of alleged vertebrate accomplishment. This time round 
we're promised swans, deer and "Mr and Mrs Beaver". A euphemism? One lives in 
hope.

Deep Water
9pm, Channel 4

In October 1968, amateur sailor Donald Crowhurst clambered on to his 
self-designed trimaran and set off on the Golden Globe yacht race. His boat 
leaked like a colander and yet on he sailed, pride and terror clanging like 
funeral bells, "a tiny figure disappearing over the horizon". Crowhurst's 
downfall provides the framework for this exceptional, desperately sad film, his 
fool-hardiness offering a horribly stark warning of "the danger of ideas".

Visions of the Future
9pm, BBC4

Dr Michio Kaku has seen the future. It eats microchips and lives online in a 
virtual hyper-kingdom, where it pretends to be a blue dragon and has sex with 
goths. And it's brilliant. Allegedly. "The ocean of truth is no longer 
undiscovered!" squeaks the theoretical physicist, by way of explanation, as a 
gentle breeze ruffles his silk blouse, which has been left unbuttoned at the 
top in order to facilitate the ebb and flow of his Astonishing Theoretical 
Physicist Genius. It's tomorrow's world today! Or rather, it's Tomorrow's 
World, from 1989, but with more goths!

Guff, frankly.

Interview With a Cannibal
10pm, Five

Armin Meiwes is a cannibal. In 2002, he ate an engineer's penis before going 
to bed with a Star Trek book. Here, the incarcerated German explains why he ate 
an engineer's penis before going to bed with a Star Trek book. It was 
consensual, apparently. And it tasted like pork. (The penis, that is. Not the 
Star Trek book. That tasted like trees.) "Since then, he is always with me," 
lisps Meiwes, boringly, as we cut to a photo of said engineer, expressionless 
in a corduroy jacket.
 