
It's dark outside, you're thinking of leaving the office - if you haven't 
already left - and you're wondering if you remembered to take your ready meal 
out of the freezer this morning. It can only mean one thing - it's nearly time 
for theAutumnwatch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch> live 
blog!

The story so far. There once was a programme called Springwatch, which was so 
successful it spawned a seasonal spin-off,Autumnwatch. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/earth/nature/uk/autumnwatch/>

But while Springwatch had new-born baby blue tits - in fact, new-born baby 
birds of every sort - Autumnwatch has rutting deers and, this year, a couple of 
beavers.

Which means, as some of you have already noticed, instead of tit jokes we get 
beaver gags. Slightly more sophisticated, no?

Now I'm a big Oddie fan, but this autumn's offering has been a bit lacklustre 
so far. The starling stuff has all been seen before - impressive though it 
undoubtedly is - and the experiment with the expensive night vision camera 
stuff was a disaster. Maybe the BBC budget cuts have already started to bite.

And don't even get me started on the comedy "duckcams". Maybe they will come 
good tonight. The third part of the Oddie and Kate Humble triumvirate - Simon 
King - is off somewhere new tonight, so let's hope he finds somewhere promising.

In the meantime, does anyone want to know about my trip to see the birds at 
Snettisham <http://www.rspb.org.uk/reserves/guide/s/snettisham/about.asp>? 
Thought not. But you can read about it here. It's really amazing. Just make 
sure you go on a very high tide, eh?

More interestingly, take a look at the time Bill Oddie met Emu 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqr6OWPfLKU>. Bet you can't guess what happens. 
Autumnwatch, tonight, BBC2, 8pm.

7.50pm: Hello! Have you got your field guide? (It tells you what birds look 
like). Have you got your binoculars? I have. I am sitting in a room six houses 
down the road and watching a TV through their front window, just like real bird 
watching! It's brilliant!

Just to make it even more realistic, I have a flask of coffee and am 
surrounded by people at least twice my age. That's not fair - birdwatchers can 
be young as well, you know. Just ask my mate Woody. Right - on BBC2 at the 
moment, Top Gear from Sunday. More than 6 million people watched that, 
approximately the same number of people reading this.

8pm: "Thursdays are funny," said BBC2. Wrong! We decided a little while back 
they are "moderately amusing". Tonight, Wednesdays are feathery on BBC2. And 
furry. And ferocious, in the case of those rutting deers.

Here they come! It's Bill and Kate with a brolly being showered by a chap 
standing over them with a bucket of leaves. Yes! It's Spring, no hang on, it's 
Autumnwatch! Haha, those guys! And hello, MelBel!8.10pm Simon King is.... in 
the Forest of Dean, hotfooted from Somerset where he was yesterday. So what's 
he going to be looking at? And will it involve rubbish night vision cameras? 
It's... a bleedin' wookie! No, it's not. Oh, he's not telling us. In the 
meantime, it's beaver watch! Oooh, they're so sweet! Vegetarians, don't you 
know. What is it with Bill's hair? No, seriously. Talk about a bad dye job, 
autumnal red or not.

"There is nothing more belligerent than a flipping swan," says Bill. I love it 
when he says "flipping". Will he have an Anchorman moment one day do you think? 
Ooh, fighting swans! It's like Big Brother a couple of series back. But without 
the booze. Honk! Honk! That's the geese.

Ah, Bill's first mention of Hampstead Heath, where he lives, eight minutes in. 
Not a record. Why don't they base it in Hampstead Heath? Bill sees a lot of 
interesting stuff there.

8.13pm: Did you know seagulls eat ducks? I didn't. Actually, seagulls is a 
generic term, there is no such thing. You've got herring gulls, and great black 
backed gulls, and oh I've lost you. All of you. Coming up: red squirrels. Oh, 
look at those tufty ears! Had a pheasant in the garden once, you know. He 
didn't stay long - I didn't even have time to load.

8.15pm: Ah, back to Simon in the Forest of Dean. I wonder if this is going to 
be a record breaking blog? But not necessarily in a good way. "I've been 
looking for nibbled nuts," says Simon. Research suggests if you remove the 
double entendres from this show, it lasts precisely eight minutes. Simon's 
great isn't he? I SAID SIMON'S GREAT, ISN'T HE?

8.18pm: Right, Simon's about to reveal the great big wild animal that lives in 
the Forest of Dean. (Yes, thanks, Amanda50, "those", not "hose". I have changed 
it in case of misunderstanding). So what's the great big animal? It's a... It's 
a... It's a... WILD BOOR! Ay carumba! I saw a tame boor once and I hate to say 
this... but he eat his own poo. That is why I don't eat wild boor sausage. Or 
tame ones. Back to hose rutting deer! Those rutting deer of course. Ha ha. Ha 
ha. Ha ha.

8.20pm: Ah Percy the deer is trying to mate but he's not very good at it! Cue 
Mick Jagger and "he can't get not satisfaction". "He's got a really funny 
thing," says my girlfriend. Not the first time she's said that.

8.26pm: Because it is a wildlife programme, I am drinking Badger Beer. Golden 
Champion, since you ask. Percy is still king of the deer, despite those 
"issues" earlier on. He needs to get down Anne Summers. Just don't try and take 
it back after you've opened the packaging. Bill just said "irresponsible casual 
sex". Ten points in your I-Spy book! Next up, because I know you care, barn 
owls! Uh-oh, here comes the big brother who eat his little brother. They named 
him Hannibal. His brother was called "food".

8.30pm: Ahhhh! Two little beavers play boxing. And a comedy beaver with a 
giant carrot in his mouth. THIS IS WHAT THE LICENCE FEE IS ALL ABOUT! Oh, it's 
Gordon Buchanan and his Glasgow foxes. Forgive the capital letters again, but 
BORING! And the winner of best factual programme is... oh sorry, wrong blog.

8.34pm: Inspired by StephenDB (see below) I have switched momentarily to ITV1. 
There's a big black dog! Oh hang on, yes, he's right, there is a powerful 
looking chest. And it's on a woman. Back to Simon King. Ooh, look, it's a 
lovely little fox. I have ordered my girlfriend to hit the record button 
downstairs for ITV1. It's for her own good, you understand. Come on people, 
wherever you are, stick with the public service action! You can always turn 
over to Bravo at 9pm.

8.35pm: "These are critters that can weigh 30 stone." No, it's not Trinny 
talking boobs on ITV1. It's Simon King talking wild boor, all right?

8.37pm: I can't believe it - they really ARE weighing boobs on ITV1. And 
converting the weight into bags of sugar. And then converting it into how many 
cups of tea (one teaspoon, please) that could make. I have now taken the 
batteries out of the remote control to stop me flicking to ITV1. I suggest you 
do the same. Both of you.

8.44pm: I promise I have not been watching ITV1. The summer floods were very 
bad news for wildlife, says Bill. Serious bit here. You can tell because he is 
sprinkling hundreds and thousands onto a plant and Kate is spraying it with a 
hose. Am I watching CBBC by mistake? I should say we had a giant rat in the 
garden as well. It was about then I decided not to put Christmas pudding on the 
bird table.8.46pm: Williamt - space shuttle landing or still photo of long 
tailed tit? You gotta get your priorities right!

8.49pm: Kate is in Iceland. Apparently it's like a giant bird table in the 
middle of the sea. Ooh, look at all those geese! I've got a week off next month 
- Iceland, Northern Lights in Norway, or rack up half a year's units at various 
Christmas parties to which I probably haven't been invited?

8.52pm: Coming soon: an American Hot pizza.

8.53pm: Ah, DonnieD, yes. Bill and Kate have joked that he coloured it red coz 
it's autumn, get it? Others on the BBC messageboard rather unkindly suggested 
he was going rusty.

8.55pm: Simon King has just had the "most extraordinary encounter with a wild 
animal he ever had". But we have to tune in tomorrow to find out. Gah! All I 
know is that it involved a wild boor. I reckon it goes back into the woods and 
pulls out a completed sudoku. A really hard one!

8.57pm: Can you hear that pinging noise? It's coming from downstairs. It 
sounds like an oven's timer. It IS an oven's timer. My pizza! Noooooooooooooo! 
I'm just leafing through our market research which suggested Autumnwatch would 
be our biggest rating blog yet. Some people.

"Anthony Perkins? That's the bloke from Psycho, isn't it?" says Bill. Another 
10 points in your I-Spy book.

8.59pm: Bill: "That's a typical beaver shot, if you'll forgive the phrase." 
Come on, I waited 59 minutes, give me a break. Have you see what I've got to 
compete with on ITV1?

9.02pm: Hfactor, what a disaster! I would do another hour but my pizza is 
ready and my girlfriend has fallen asleep. Dreaming of Percy, probably. Percy 
from Blackadder, that is. Bill and Kate have gone too. Thank you for all your 
comments. And I mean all of them, you beautiful, lovely people. See you at 
Snettisham for the next spring tide.
 