
Allegations are flying around the web, news sites and social media that 
Anheuser-Busch InBev is watering down Budweiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/27/anheuser-busch-beer-watering-down-lawsuit>
 in the US. Labels stating the strength of Budweiser are inaccurate, the 
lawsuit states. Anheuser-Busch InBev has denied these accusations, but that 
does not stop a suit where ex-employees of Anheuser-Busch have come forward to 
the plaintiff's attorneys and said that Budweiser is watered down. Personally, 
I'm not sure anyone can tell what watered down water tastes like but, that 
aside, I like to deal in facts, not rumor and speculation.

Is Anheuser-Busch watering down Budweiser? I would say the answer is, more 
than likely, yes. Should that be shocking to you? No, and let me tell you why. 
I think Anheuser-Busch might add water, to water down Budweiser or any of the 
other beers named in the lawsuit, at the end of the brewing process to achieve 
the desired and labelled ABV (alcohol by volume). In brewing, there will always 
be inconsistencies. Raw ingredients will vary from year to year and field to 
field no matter how detailed and specific you are in sourcing these ingredients.

Common sense tells me, if I want a consistent 5% ABV beer, then I should brew 
a beer that is consistently stronger than 5% ABV and add a little water to each 
batch to achieve the desired and labelled 5% ABV. This is how distilleries 
achieve their desired ABV – or proof – on a bottle of whiskey or vodka.

Attorney Josh Boxer of San Rafael, California, who represents plaintiff Nina 
Giampaoli of Sonoma County, is privy to a lot more of the facts than we 
currently are, but for every winning lawsuit, there is another that is a loss. 
We have yet to see any proof. Former Anheuser-Busch employees stating that it 
is corporate practice to water down their beer sounds damning, but lets wait on 
the facts. How come there was not an attorney saying,

"We have tested cans and bottles of Budweiser, randomly selected from 
different stores throughout the state of California, and found that, of those 
cans and bottles tested, a significant percentage of them showed a lower 
alcohol by volume than as advertised on the product's label."

That would put more weight in the plaintiff's claim. It would make me feel 
like the lawsuit had teeth.

Should the allegations prove to be true, Anheuser-Busch InBev will lose in 
court. They will pay monetarily and might be fined by the government but does a 
company that is buying theremaining portion of Grupo Modelo for $20.1 bn  
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303649504577495921266834262.html>
care that they lost a lawsuit for a few million dollars? Anheuser-Busch InBev's 
reputation will be tarnished, they will lose a few dollars, stockholders will 
be upset, but the average beer drinker is still going to buy his or her 6-pack, 
12-pack or case of Budweiser at the grocery store on Friday. This same consumer 
probably cannot tell the difference between 4% ABV Budweiser and 5% ABV 
Budweiser. I'm not sure even I could.

What I will say to those that continually buy Budweiser, Miller or Coors is 
that watered-down, flavorless beer is not a new invention. Eighty percent of 
American beer drinkers drink it as their beer of choice. Put back the case of 
Budweiser or Bud Light (aka MacroBeer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> or Big Beer) and buy a craft 
beer that is made locally. Load Google or Bing or Yahoo in your web browser and 
search for a local brewery in your town.

On average, everyone in the US lives within 10 miles  
<http://www.craftbeer.com/breweries/brewery-locator/find-a-us-brewery>of a 
craft brewery so, more than likely, you will find a local brewery within a 
short drive of your home or place of work. Some of these craft breweries will 
bottle their beer, others will sell only draft beer but they may sell 64-ounce
growlers <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beer_bottle#Growler>of fresh, local beer 
for you to take home. Start out with one of their lighter craft beers, which 
will be stronger and taste better than macro beer you're used to. A pale ale, 
cream ale or kölsch style ale would be a good starting point.

You'll find a whole new world of beer is out there, and it is called craft 
beer. We have over 2,000 craft breweries in the US that brew up a wonderful 
product day in and day out. Buy local, fresh craft beer that is made by 
breweries who employ local people. It won't taste like water.
 