
Earlier this year we booked a two-night stay in Singapore through Airbnb. All 
communications with the owner were via the Airbnb website. However, on arrival 
large posters in the lift made it clear thatAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> short lets were illegal in this 
building.

We eventually agreed with the owner that we would sleep in the apartment free 
of charge (it was late and we had been travelling all day) and find alternative 
accommodation in the morning. Our payment of £255 was refunded by Airbnb, but 
that does not compensate for the fact that we spent more than planned on a 
last-minute hotel.

Incidentally, the original Airbnb account under which we had booked had been 
closed after a guest posted a review stating that they, too, had learned the 
rental was illegal upon arrival, even noting a police visit.

Airbnb said it did not know about this and would hand it over to its legal 
team, but I have heard nothing further.PC, Epsom, Surrey 

Airbnb now has well over a million properties and is active in 200 countries. 
The decision by Berlin in June to ban short-term rentals on Airbnb set a 
precedent for similar bans elsewhere, and restrictions are now in place in New 
York, San Francisco and Barcelona. However, this seems to be less a 
country-wide legality issue in Singapore, and more a specific building 
restriction – something that is not uncommon.

In a statement Airbnb said: “We remind hosts to check and follow local rules 
before they list their space, and provide helpful information and links to 
official information on our responsible hosting page. These can differ from 
suburb to suburb, street to street or, in this case, from building to building. 
We offered our assistance in rebooking the guest. We have also refunded the 
full reservation.”

It even went so far as to say that it has “a warm, positive working 
relationship” with the Singapore government. Hmm …

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 