
BBC1 controller Lorraine Heggessey has said the channel would welcome back 
disgraced Have I Got News for You anchorAngus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> despite his sacking 
over a year ago in the wake of a sex and drug-taking scandal.

"The opportunity is there for him to present other shows on BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> and if we come up with the right 
format or he comes up with the right format then he's most welcome back," said 
Ms Heggessey, who ruled out a return to Have I Got News for You for Deayton, 
arguing the show was better without him.

"I can't give Angus his job back because he's lost his credibility as the 
presenter of that show. The interesting thing is that because the show's been 
running a long time I think Paul [Merton] and Ian [Hislop] themselves act as 
hosts. I think that it's even better," she said.

Since Deayton was axed from the show in October 2002 following revelations 
about his private life, he has been replaced by regular guest presenters that 
have proved a hit with viewers.

Celebrities including former Tory leader William Hague, Anne Robinson and 
Boris Johnson have given the veteran BBC1 news quiz an added dimension, claimed 
Ms Heggessey.

While Deayton has rarely appeared on BBC1 since his sacking, he has made 
appearances on a range of BBC2 shows, including Nighty Night, Absolute Power 
and Comic Relief University Challenge, as well as on ITV1 presenting a 
documentary about David and Victoria Beckham's move to Spain.

He is scheduled to appear on BBC1's Before They Were Famous this Christmas. 

Speaking on BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 5 Live, Ms 
Heggessey was also forced to defend BBC1's breakfast and Six O'Clock News 
bulletins, after the latter was accused by one viewer of being "facile" and 
more "akin to Newsround"æ than a serious news programme.

"The Six O'Clock News is our most watched bulletin and we try to reflect a 
news agenda we think is right for that time of night,' said Ms Heggessey. "We 
have got Andrew Marr now reporting for the Six O'Clock and George Alagiah and 
Sophie Raworth are two fantastic presenters."

BBC1's breakfast show also came in for a pasting, with one viewer claiming 
that the BBC had turned it from a serious bulletin with journalistic kudos into 
a "GMTV-style" show and drafted in Sky's Natasha Kaplinsky in a desperate bid 
for ratings, with BBC bosses lowering the bulletin's coffee table so viewers 
could see her legs.æ

Ms Heggessey said: "I don't get involved in decisions like lowering coffee 
tables, but Natasha is an extremely popular presenter with lots of our viewers 
- particularly a lot of our male viewers."

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 