
For decades, Paul Rogers, the indefatigable, lateral- thinking, emeritus 
professor of peace studies, has warned about the consequences of western 
military adventures, urging us to consider the root causes of conflict.

In his new book, Irregular War (IB Tauris <http://www.ibtauris.com/>) , he 
reflects on Isis, al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Al Shabab, and the Taliban - all 
separate manifestations, he says, of a new non-state dynamic driving 
international conflict throughasymmetric and hybrid warfare. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/defence-and-security-blog/2016/may/19/britain-is-not-at-war-with-russia-nor-is-it-at-peace>


But their significance is more fundamental. They are part of what Rogers calls 
“an historical shift towards revolts from the margins”. And such revolts are 
made more likely by “the widening global socio-economic divide and the onset of 
climate disruption”.


The key word, one that crops up time and again in this important and 
thought-provoking treatise, is “marginalisation”. Marginalisation was one of 
the main factors, with anger at autocracy, compounded by the high rate of 
unemployment among the (educated) youth that fuelled the Arab Awakening in 
2011, Rogers argues.

The causes of conflict are many and deep – economic, political, societal, 
environmental, demographic.

In this holistic approach, he points to the enormous and growing gap between 
the world’s rich and poor. But the old division between rich countries and poor 
countries no longer applies as figures from the US demonstrate dramatically.


Rogers points to David Hulme’s book, Global Poverty: Global Governance and 
Poor People in the Post-2015 Era – while the global poverty rate may be 
declining slowly, the relative poverty rate in high-income countries has 
increased, and has more than doubled in the developing world. Meanwhile, the 
global military-industrial complex consumes some $1,700 bn a year.

There are likely to be two fundamental trends threatening world security, 
according to Rogers. One is “the increasing marginalisation of the majority of 
the world’s people caused by the workings of the neo-liberal system of 
international economic activity” which concentrates most of the fruits of 
economic growth in the hands of a transglobal elite of some 1.5bn people.


The other is climate change. “It is now well nigh certain”, he writes, “that 
climate change is going to lead to huge problems of food supply and also to far 
more dangerous episodes of extreme weather, with profound political and social 
effects”. The author adds: “Overall, it is the link between environmental 
limits and a world economy not fit for purpose that underpins the security 
challenge”.

Rogers says he is cautiously optimistic. He points to developments in 
alternative energy technology, notably solar and wind power. Some of the most 
significant movements for social change in the twentieth century were notable 
for their non-violent approach. Nuclear catastrophe has been avoided.

“The next two decades”, he concludes, “ are likely to prove pivotal in 
avoiding an unstable and insecure world, but there is immense potential for 
positive change and huge possibilities”.
 