
The revelations by the Guardian on corporate tax arrangements reveal an 
appetite for tax avoidance that still pervades within major corporations, the 
biggest firms of accountants and, as importantly, in some European Union 
states. Each of these matters – not just because of lost tax in the UK and 
other major countries but because they reveal a rottenness at the core of 
modern capitalism and the political systems that support it.

The excuses companies offer for pursuing aggressive tax-avoidance activity 
always include claims that they are acting in the interests of their 
shareholders. It is interesting thatShire plc 
<http://www.shire.com/shireplc/en/home>, in its response to the Guardian, has 
extended that justification to the company’s stakeholders.

But the law makes clear that the duty of the directors is to the company itself
 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/46/section/172>. And since there is 
nothing in law that says a company’s duty is to minimise its tax or maximise 
profit, the claims justifying companies’ tax abuse are simply not true. They 
spread a myth that is without foundation.

It’s a dangerous myth, too, that positively harms the company and all its 
stakeholders. It is very doubtful that any company will ever benefit from the 
type of exposure Shire and others are getting. That’s a failure by the 
directors.

But more specifically, this abuse can also specifically harm the shareholders, 
most of whom will be almost wholly unaware of the risks the companies in which 
they invest are taking: for example, the company earnings may be misstated, 
which will mean that the share price is overstated.

There are, though, three clear groups who do benefit. The first are company 
executives: tax avoidance inflates net profits after tax, and hence share 
prices that then boost their bonus payments.

Second, the professional firms creating and selling these arrangements clearly 
think they benefit from the considerable fees involved. But the credibility of 
these firms – who are the effective and sole policing agency of capitalism 
worldwide – risks being corrupted in the process. This would mean there would 
be no agent we can rely on to provide an objective assessment of what happens 
in major corporations.

Thirdly, the tax havens who facilitate these structures also think they gain, 
but here the logic is yet again warped. Luxembourg gains little tax from these 
practices and so the gain goes largely to the financial professionals within 
the duchy who effectively dominate its government. The result is that we have 
states effectively captured by finance that threaten the very essence of 
democracy as they serve plutocratic goals.

What can be done about all this? First, we need vastly better 
country-by-country reporting of where and how companies operate in their 
accounts. I originally designed thisform of accounting now being adopted by the 
OECD <http://www.taxresearch.org.uk/Documents/CBC2012.pdf>, but so far it has 
been used only for tax returns and not for public disclosure.

Second, the cosy arrangement that lets the International Accounting Standards 
Board, dominated by the big accountant firms 
<http://www.ifrs.org/About-us/Pages/IFRS-Foundation-and-IASB.aspx>, set the 
standards that allow these transactions to be hidden from view has to end. We 
need government-set, internationally agreed tax-reporting standards that ensure 
all stakeholders get all the information they need to appraise tax risk in 
companies, large and small.

Third, the OECD crackdown on tax havens <http://www.oecd.org/ctp/beps.htm> as 
part of the G20 process must continue, and the EU has to tackle its member 
countries that seek to undermine open markets by promoting tax abuse.

And finally, the tax profession has to drum out those people and firms who 
promote such schemes, nationally or internationally, if it is to retain any 
shred of ethical credibility.

Those things are all possible. Those who believe in the mixed economy, the 
merits of regulated markets and the ability of business to deliver for all 
should be championing them. The absence of current cheerleaders in the business 
community for that cause tells us a lot, and gives massive cause for concern.
 