
On our allotments, we dread the Letter. The Letter comes from the plot 
committee and is delivered to anyone whose plot is in a state of disarray. The 
Letter means that the plot-holder risks being turfed off – and turfing off does 
happen.

In practice, the Letter only comes after a few verbal warnings. But still, you 
don’t want one. I think about the Letter often, because I have a full-sized 
plot. It’s not sensible – it was probably a daft decision – but I couldn’t 
resist, because when I was shown around possible plots (yes, that’s a plural, 
because all the stars had aligned and there were several plots available) this 
one had an orchard and shed at one end and a sturdy, if dilapidated, greenhouse 
at the other. I couldn’t choose.

Don't lose the plot: share your allotment pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/aug/10/dont-lose-the-plot-share-your-allotment-pictures>
Since then, in the year I’ve had the plot, I’ve battled and battled with weeds 
and more weeds. Many times I’ve regretted my decision. I’m not married, I have 
no children, and I don’t need six allotment beds. But I love them, and I love 
all my huge, weed-assailed plot. Even so, I think Charlie Dimmock was talking 
sense when shesuggested 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/celebritynews/11807682/Charlie-Dimmock-sparks-row-over-allotment-sizes.html>
 that newly available plots could be halved or quartered.

Her suggestion was met with uproar: 250 square metres is the perfect size to 
feed a family of four, saidthe National Allotments Society 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/allotment-info/>. “A quarter plot couldn’t feed a 
family dog,”sniffed 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3201396/Charlie-Dimmock-digs-hole-call-shrink-allotments-Former-Ground-Force-star-told-stick-ponds-suggesting-plots-split-allow-people-grow-fruit-veg.html>
 Sean James Cameron.

I don’t know what size his dog is, nor why it would be eating runner beans and 
courgettes, and not dog food, but I do know his statement is daft. The beauty 
of growing your own food is that it can be done anywhere. There are urban 
guerrilla gardeners everywhere from south central LA to Todmorden. You can grow 
food in yoghurt pots, sacks or old baths; on balconies, rooftops or wasteland.

The objections arise from the idea that people have plots in order to be 
self-sufficient. But this is not true. There are as many reasons to have an 
allotment or to grow your own food as there are allotment holders. The 
allotmenters I know possess a wide mix of incentives and techniques, from the 
old Irish boys – as they are known – who turn their entire plots into potato 
fields, to the permaculture fans who go wilder but still get good harvests, to 
the neat freaks with paths of beautiful manicured lawn and raised beds.

Then there’s mine, which is a work in progress of weeds, a wild orchard, 
roses, camellias and accidental success with fruit bushes, broccoli and runner 
beans. (That’s one thing Charlie Dimmock got wildly wrong: there are countless 
more bean wigwams on my plots than chilli plants.)

I’ve probably taken on too much but I compensate by handing out produce to my 
neighbours and workmates. I don’t grow food to be fully self-sustainable but 
for the beauty of seeing things grow and the joy of eating something I have 
picked and grown myself. That this eminently natural concept should have become 
so alien to us is what is actually outrageous.

There are as many reasons to have an allotment or to grow your own food as 
there are allotment-holders

So is the vulnerability of plots. Guidelines published in 2014 on when 
councils are allowed to dispose of allotments pointed out that “allotments are 
valuable community spaces that provide people with the opportunity to enjoy an 
active and healthy lifestyle”. But campaigners still protest that allotments 
are being grabbed by councils desperate for housing land. Watford has launched 
a third bid to build onFarm Terrace plots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/09/farm-terrace-allotment-holders-launch-campaign-to-save-nations-plots>
, despite having lost two bids.A freedom of information request 
<http://www.localgov.co.uk/Pickles-urged-to-stop-councils-deregulating-allotments/38161>
 found that the government had turned down only four of 99 requests to use 
allotment land, between 2007 and 2013, andthe National Allotments Society warns 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/news/local-plans-target-allotment-sites/> that the 
2011 Localism Act could be a perfect chance for allotment plots to be 
identified as housing land.

Brighton and Hove, Dorset and Bristol have highlighted plots as potential 
housing. When Barnsley council published the results of a consultation, its 
list of essential services included public open space but not allotments.

Housing needs are crucial, but so is something else that only allotments and 
gardening can provide. I often tell the story of an Indian ship crew who came 
to port and asked for only one thing: to be taken to walk on grass. “We live 
surrounded by metal,” they told the port chaplain. They were taken to a 
graveyard, removed their shoes and walked on the grass barefoot, then returned 
to their ship, to live among metal. We all live among too much metal and 
concrete. Having contact with earth is an essential service, no matter what 
size the plot.
 