
It sounds magisterial, going on highfalutin. "We have shifted the terms of 
debate here in the UK away from the febrile confines of the ABC circulation 
figures to a broader and more meaningful definition of audience, based on both 
print and digital consumers." Thank you Lionel Barber, revered editor of the 
Financial Times, delivering this year's Cudlipp lecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/31/lionel-barber-hugh-cudlipp-lecture>
 – and a pox on all febrile concerns. If only it were true, that is.

The media question of the year, maybe even of the decade, is whether such 
"meaningful definitions" can be found for an industry that direly needs them. 
But don't expect a convincing answer any time soon. What ought to be easy in a 
digital age is proving dismayingly elusive.

Measuring print audiences is simple enough. You can find out how many copies a 
paper sold in a month via the Audit Bureau of Circulations, which records all 
physical sales: then you can mix and match those results with the findings of 
the National Readership Survey, a giant opinion poll asking people who reads 
what. Put those two sets of data together and a reasonably clear picture 
emerges.

But try the same exercise online and mists roll in. The ABC, which 
mechanically counts electronic devices of whatever kind browsing from site to 
site, tells me that there were 53,943,426 connections to Mail Online in 
December (or an average of 3,044,961 a day). That's a 60.32% increase since 
December 2009. Equally, theGuardian's site has seen an 18.32% daily average 
rise to 2,234,360, maintaining a strong second place. How many browsers were 
here in Britain, how many overseas? ABC has those figures, as it does for 
print. But what about the more-meaningfulFT?

Its ABC online figures are "not available". Like most of News International's 
stable of papers, it shelters secretively behind a paywall now. I can tell you 
that its British print circulation was down to 103,898 in December, and that 
the number of bulk giveaways within that total had swelled a bit. But if you 
want further and better information (as anFT ad customer, say) then you'll have 
to ask Pink 'Un HQ yourself. Prepare to wander in perplexing fields where the 
other great international monitors of digital usage – Nielsen and Comscore – 
basically rely on polling panels, not devices, and produce very different 
results.

Those 54 million or so Mail browsers – what might they rate as 
Nielsen-recorded "unique users"? UKOM/Nielsen has that Mail figure at just a 
tenth of the ABC total, and Comscore's score is different again. What's the 
problem? They measure people, not machines. They set separate age limits for 
sampling. They count home and office usage, but nothing in between. They're 
UK-only. And there are other little fiddly things that produce different 
answers to different questions.

Nothing necessarily wrong with that. "It's like asking what the population of 
London is," says one top analyst, "but we all know there are dozens of ways of 
defining London." Nothing wrong, either, with the National Readership Survey's 
almost-realised ambition to use Nielsen results to flesh out its own print 
readership monitoring. But there is something wrong with the end result. At 
least three industry-owned assessors measuring by different standards. A bevy 
of analysts competing to add their spin. Real confusion over how many site 
visitors just click through in a trice, as they Google away, and how many stop 
to "engage" with the digital page they're reading. Even more confusion about 
what's meaningful. (See theNew York Times's long-gestated master plan to erect 
a paywall so porous that it doesn't really diminish their visitor or browser 
totals. Compromise is the mother of invention.)

Will newspapers ever make true financial sense of the web? Not until we know 
which figures matter, which convince advertisers – and which are mere febrile 
concerns.

• This article was amended on 7 Feburary 2011. According to the ABC, there 
were an average of 3,044,961 connections to Mail Online each day in December, 
not 1,899,272 as previously stated. The Guardian's site has seen a 2,234,360 
daily average rise, not 39,067,825 as previously stated - this was a monthly 
figure.
 