
The time for talking hasn't stopped, as someone said of the Haye-Klitschko 
saga. It has just started. Again.

Adam Booth's appearance on Sky's Ringside programme, sparring across the ether 
with the brothers' manager, Bernd Bonte, left the clear and hardly shocking 
impression that what stops big fights happening is not just money but ego. They 
clearly have put personal bragging rights into the negotiations, and that is 
not good for either their fighters, the sport or fans. They need to grow up.

A combination of greed and ego killed Pacquiao-Mayweather. It stopped Joe 
Calzaghe and Roy Jones Jr getting together until they were both past their 
best. It killed Hopkins-Jones, Hopkins-Calzaghe and Froch-Calzaghe. It got in 
the way of Ricky Hatton ever fighting Junior Witter. Ego stopped Tszyu-De La 
Hoya, Foreman-Holmes, Benn-Jones, Pavlik-Abraham and a string of other hugely 
attractive fights.

For all his faults, the man with the all-time biggest ego in boxing, Don King, 
rarely let it stop him putting on some of the greatest fights the ugly old 
business has ever seen. He usually found a way. Sometimes it was even ethical.

Come back, Don. All is forgiven.

Thank you, and good night

One punch. That's all it takes. But it doesn't always take you where you want 
to go.

When Sergio Martínez's left hook sent the US middleweight Paul Williams 
toppling face first to unconsciousness in the second round to keep his WBC 
title in Atlantic City on Saturday night, the Argentinian imagined he had 
opened the door to a place among the modern greats. Surely, he reckoned, he 
could temptManny Pacquiao <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> to 
step up another weight and try for his ninth title in a different division. 
Maybe Floyd Mayweather Jr would like to take him on.

Martínez says he was robbed last December when he first fought Williams, one 
of US boxing's bigger honchos. That was on points after they'd both been down 
in round one. Next up Martínez took on another American hero, Kelly Pavlik, and 
won emphatically over 12 rounds. Still, he stirred no great commercial noise. 
He would have to give Williams another chance.

When Martínez landed the chilling blow, he felt doubly satisfied in 
identifying his opponent's weakness. "I knew he was going to make a mistake," 
he said, "because he always does. He left me a lot of room to hit him." But the 
champion's euphoria lasted as long as it took his promoter, Lou DiBella, to 
reacquaint him with the realities of life and boxing (which, occasionally, are 
the same thing).

"If you're Pacquiao, would you go near him?" DiBella asked later. "You think 
Mayweather will fight him? We're going to have a problem making the next fight 
because that's how good he is. I have the best fighter in the world." Except 
he's got a massive punch and he's Argentinian. You can be sure if he was a 
homegrown American with an apple-pie story to tell, the TV guys would be 
clearing the schedules for him right now.

Kevin Iole, a respected US boxing writer for many years, featured just 15 
non-Americans in his recent list ofboxing's 100 most influential people 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/box/news%E2%80%99slug=ki-topfifty090510>. Lennox 
Lewis, the last undisputed world heavyweight champion, sneaks in at 94. 
Muhammad Ali is No1 – no argument there. But some of the people in between them 
take your breath away: Howard Cosell at 10; the hugely overrated Cus D'Amato at 
22; Bert Sugar at 28; Bruce Trampler at 32; Murray Goodman at 41; Irving Rudd 
at 42 … a collection of industry insiders and others elevated way beyond their 
importance – ahead of the people who really matter, the fighters.

Here are some outside the top 50: Teofilo Stevenson, 92; Aaron Pryor, 86; 
Alexis Arguello, 59; Jose Torres, 57. Pacquiao, by the way, comes in at 25 – 15 
places below the blow-hard egotist Cosell, who so loved the sport that gave him 
his living he wanted it banned the moment he hung up his microphone and his wig.

Buckland's chance

Gary Buckland knows the magic of the single blow. The Welsh super-feather 
started the Prizefighter tournament at York Hall on Saturday night with just 
six stoppages in 18 fights over five largely anonymous years in the business. 
He was the pup in the field at 24. Gary Sykes, the British champion, was a 
slight favourite, ahead of the adopted Mongolian Choi Tseveenpurev, who'd held 
fringe versions of the world title, and the accomplished scouser "Dirty" Derry 
Matthews.

Buckland knocked out Sykes in one round (the champ's first loss) and stopped 
Matthews with a withering body shout in round two to take the £32,000 prize. 
Opponents will be watching those hitherto lightly regarded fists a little more 
closely in future.

Poor Audley

Can you forgive Audley Harrison, after a week's reflection on his miserable 
performance against David Haye? Oliver Fennell, writing forBoxrec.com 
<http://news.boxrec.com/>, can. And he says, Yes, you can too. It's an 
interesting argument, based ondollops of human understanding 
<http://news.boxrec.com/news/2010/can-you-forgive-audley-yes-you-can>.

I don't buy it. Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing>, like it or 
not, is brutal. Its judgments are harsh. There is little room for compassion – 
certainly between fighters during a contest. If there is some understanding for 
the loser afterwards, it should take into account the effort he put in. Audley 
could have finished his career a hero for life if he'd even vaguely tried to 
live up to his pre-fight promise: "I will fight every second of every minute of 
every round."

No, he didn't. And, no I can't forgive him.
 