
The Italian who co-owns Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> with private equity firm 
KKR has angrily defended its tax affairs, arguing that they were not salting 
away millions "in Swiss bank accounts" but reinvesting profits in expanding the 
group.

The company behind the Boots the Chemist chain has been targeted by the 
protest groupUK Uncut <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk-uncut> because its tax 
bill has fallen sharply after the debt-fuelled £11bn takeover in 2007. It made 
operating profits of £1bn in the year to March but paid only £59m tax.

"We don't distribute any dividends," said executive chairman Stefano Pessina. 
"It is not like hundreds of millions of pounds are going to KKR and myself... 
we are not taking money and putting it in Swiss bank accounts."

Pessina, who is based in Monaco and is estimated to have a personal fortune of 
$1.4bn (about £860m), said it had invested close to a £1bn in its stores and 
acquisitions that were creating jobs. The group has focused on chipping away at 
the £9bn of debt it used to fund what was Europe's biggest leveraged buyout.

Its finance director, George Fairweather, said it had paid back £546m during 
the year, reducing its borrowings to £7.8bn. He explained the low tax bill by 
pointing to borrowing costs of £381m, which are tax-deductible, as well as the 
tax relief received on the near £250m injected into its pension schemes. "I 
make no apology," he said. "We are doing the right thing for people like our 
pensioners."

Fairweather said it would be another four years until the group was under 
pressure to refinance and he did not expect difficulty finding backers as its 
creditworthiness was improving as debt is reduced.

Pessina also shed light on the surprise departure of group chief executive 
Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, who quit the 
his £1m-a-year job in March. Hornby was chief executive of HBOS bank when it 
had to be rescued by Lloyds bank in 2008. "Andy was stressed and decided to 
come back to a company where the workload is quite substantial, too early," he 
said.

Pessina, who turned his family's ailing Naples drug wholesaler into the 
pharmacy giant Alliance UniChem, which merged with Boots in 2006, is said to be 
a workaholic. The 69-year-old still travels the world looking for deals.

The post had promised to rehabilitate Hornby's damaged career and Pessina 
insisted that the relationship between the men had not soured, adding: "Every 
day there are managers who are stressed and decide to take some time off." 
There is no rush to replace Hornby, he said, and a search would begin "in due 
course".

Group sales jumped 15% to £20bn as Alliance Boots targeted overseas growth 
with acquisitions in Turkey and Germany. Underlying sales were flat, however, 
as both retail and drug wholesaling divisions encountered tough trading 
conditions. Like-for-like sales at Boots the Chemist finished up 0.5% after 
strong growth in dispensing but a decline in make-up sales as women traded down 
to cheaper brands. The chain's film processing business continued to decline as 
the market shifts to digital photography, and sales of baby products slid 
following stiff competition from the supermarkets.
 