
Each night, for twenty years, when darkness began to fall across the vast 
landscape of Northern Uganda, tens of thousands of children left their rural 
villages and walked the long journey into the relative safety of larger towns. 
They abandoned their beds to sleep in a stranger's doorway or amongst a heap of 
discarded rubbish, fleeing the dangers of abduction, rape and enslavement. 
Theirs is the story of a war that has raged for over two decades between the 
Ugandan government and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebels. It is a war 
that has left an estimated 30,000 children abducted and 1.6 million Ugandans 
displaced in temporary camps. A war in which children are the victims, weapons 
and terrorists: a war in which a child is forced to become a soldier.

Led by Joseph Kony, the LRA's aim is to rule Uganda according to the 10 
commandments of the Bible, and to these ends they use abducted children to work 
as soldiers or become the "wives" of LRA commanders. Often the abduction of 
these children is as traumatic as the atrocities they will learn to commit. 
World Vision representative Margret Alerotek described the story of 3 year old 
Lily*, who was forced to stab her mother in the chest, whilst her brother 
James* (6) did the same to their father. When James* refused to turn the knife 
on his sister, she was forced to kill him too. Terrified and guilt-ridden, Lily 
would go on to kill and pillage Ugandan communities amongst the ranks of LRA 
soldiers whose collective sense of fear and shame anchored them to their 
captors.

Now, as Museveni's government work towards ending the war (peace talks with 
Kony began in 2006), aid agencies across Northern Uganda face the challenge of 
rehabilitating and reintegrating child-soldiers back into their communities. 
Healing physical wounds is the easy part: in the past two years 90,000 
displaced Ugandans have returned to their homes, but many are struggling with 
the deeper scars of immense psychological trauma. Since opening their doors in 
1995 The World Vision Children of War Centre has treated over 15,000 children: 
15,000 individual stories like Lily's. Their approach to rehabilitation is a 
seemingly simple one: to teach those who have been acting as adults for so long 
how to play like a child.

Using toys, crayons and drama children are encouraged to communicate the 
experiences they cannot describe through verbal counselling. In Gulu, another 
rehab project, H.E.A.L.S (Health, Education, Art, Literacy, Sports), has added 
hip-hop dancing and team sports to their program in a bid to give children a 
new experience that will help them to have fun with their peers. Building these 
social relationships and developing simple hobbies are often alien 
opportunities to children whose only sense of community has been developed in 
the military. In this sense the support system becomes a family, for example 
H.E.A.L.S founder Jolly Okot is dubbed 'Mum' by children and staff alike.

However, the support system of rehabilitation centres is only temporary, 
eclipsed by the overriding need to reunite the children with their former 
communities. The forgiveness of a child's community is described by 
psychologists as intrinsic to the rehabilitation process; however it can be 
difficult on both sides of the reunion. For example how will a child face the 
community who watched as she murdered her parents, and how will they learn to 
forgive her? Psychologist Ilse Derluyn, author of a recent report on post 
traumatic stress in child soldiers, says that 'Since these former soldiers are 
often blamed and stigmatised for the countless atrocities they committed – 
mostly against their own people – psychological recovery and reintegration can 
be seriously complicated'. Females are especially stigmatised, as many come 
back with children conceived in the bush, as a product of forced marriage or 
rape. The cultural sensibilities of the Acholi tribe regard these girls as 
tainted and impure, and therefore successful rehabilitation requires the 
inclusion of the wider community.

An egg and two sticks has become one way to answer the problems of guilt and 
blame in the reunification process. In a public cleansing ceremony a pure white 
egg is crushed. This represents the destruction of the child's innocence by 
external forces, and is important as it underlines that the blame lies outside 
of the child. Then the child will step over two sticks: one is 'Layibi' and 
represents a return to where one used to eat. The other is an Obopo tree 
branch, traditionally used to make soap: this represents cleansing. Once the 
ceremony is completed the child will return to the village cleansed from the 
perceived pollution of the atrocities they committed. A study conducted by 
Colombia University and Save the Children adds that involving the child in 
labour-intensive public works programs can also be useful in recreating the 
image of the child as a productive member of the community.

Despite the challenges of reintegration, proof and hope for the rehabilitation 
of former child-soldiers is seen every day. It is seen in people like Jolly 
Okot, whose 'deep understanding' of the children stems from her own captivity 
amongst the LRA rebels. Who, nominated for the Nobel peace prize and voted the 
hardest working woman in Gulu, has grown to become an asset to her community. 
Her success as a business woman, philanthropist and loving mother stands as a 
promise that given the right help, former child-soldiers in Uganda can hope for 
a bright and happy future.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 