
“If you try to maintain your humanity when doing a joke and not cynically 
dismiss people’s beliefs”, began Stephen Colbert while explaining the key to 
successful political satire inan old interview 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Sj-i10SH_s&list=PL195E4166087E0449> with 
backdrop-hating talk show host Charlie Rose, “then I think people will 
hopefully respect your attempt to stay civil.”

Colbert may be the world’s foremost practitioner in the field, but he was just 
talking out of his arse there.The Chaser 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/yeswecanberra/default.htm>, the crew behind this 
country’s most successful recent attempt at political satire, built their 
reputations on obnoxious controversy: all ballsy ambushes and glorious 
shit-stirring. The humour came from seeing powerful targets such as Howard and 
Rudd squirm after being cornered into uncomfortable questioning during their 
light morning runs.

As far as political satire goes, last night’s premiere of the new ABC sketch 
show Wednesday Night Fever was a different, toothless beast entirely. The 
show’s resident host, dangly-fingered comedian Sammy J, evoked the ‘glory days’ 
of Fast Forward and The Late Show duringthe week’s press rounds 
<http://www.theage.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/abcs-new-sketch-show-harks-back-to-fast-foward-era-20130621-2omcb.html>
 – “unashamedly balls-out old-school” went the sell – but all we got was Rudd 
yelling “#yolo” and a half-arsed Downton Abbey spoof where the kickers were a 
cross-eyed Julie Bishop and the bulge in Tony Abbott’s bike shorts (“To be 
continued...”, it ended. Oh God, please don’t.) Geez, this kinda stuff wouldn’t 
even make it intoPissweak World <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=78cnkV9j-so>. 

To be fair to the cast and crew – the show is the brainchild of At Home With 
Julia’s creator Rick Kalowski, and features improv veteran Paul McCarthy and 
expert Gillard impersonator Amanda Bishop – the pilot episode came after a 
tumultuous week in which much of the contenthad to be rewritten 
<http://www.tvtonight.com.au/2013/06/wednesday-night-fever-rewrites-after-labor-spill.html>
 following last week’s spill. Such an ambitious undertaking deserves some 
praise. Plus, they were openly self-deprecating about their own inadequacies: 
the show’s house metal band, Boner Contention, introduced the series as “cheap, 
low budget comedy”. Well, the “cheap” and “low budget” parts were accurate, 
anyway.

The episode’s centrepieces were the dual impressions of McCarthy as Rudd and 
Bishop as Gillard. There was some humour in McCarthy’s stiff Rudd attempting to 
court female voters with lines like “I love abortions, just love ‘em” and 
Bishop’s uncanny nasally whine and stilted Gillard walk. But their opening 
exchange, in which a bitter Gillard hand-knitted Rudd a "conciliatory" cardigan 
with Rat F**ker scrawled across the back, was too obvious. Unless you’reFoster 
Brooks <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g6oMcJOHzt8>, an accurate impression is 
worthless without a well-drawn context. Even the awkwardly silent studio 
audience didn’t know where jokes began and ended.

A game show segment titled Publicity Whores finally saw the show bearing its 
claws, but only to take aim at targets such as Kim Kardashian and Ruby Rose 
(are you kiddin’?). Another cringingly misjudged skit titled Meet The Peeps 
featured an interview with the "Organic Mother Of The Year". I mean, who’s the 
show trying to skewer? Left-leaning vegans? Do they know they’re on the ABC?

In more promising news, the episode’s highlight was its only pre-recorded 
section, and one of its more absurd: a skit in which Quentin Tarantino shot 
Clive Palmer’s new political ad. Perhaps the show can take some tips from Heath 
Franklin’s hilariously goofy portrayal of Palmer: he ditched the verisimilitude 
and played the Queensland blowhard as a heaving dimwit, who gets buckets of KFC 
delivered for lunch and dramatically yells things like: “Who wants to eat my 
pie, motherfingers?” I’m sure it’s only a matter of time before we see Palmer 
donning that Kill Bill tracksuit at a press conference.

Given the circumstances surrounding the episode’s production, let’s just call 
the spill the show’s get out of jail free card. They better hope Malcolm 
Turnbull pulls something similar over the weekend if they need another excuse 
next week. But for now, it’s already my favourite new hatewatch. Hey, you’ve 
gotta support local sketch comedy somehow.
 