
Driving from the airport in this rural corner of Arkansas, the scent of money 
is in the air. It is an attractive neck of the woods, with verdant fields, 
farms and rolling hills. But flashy, gated housing estates have sprung up with 
BMWs parked in the drives.

The north-west of the so-called "natural state" has more than its share of 
millionaires – it is home to the world's largest retailer, Wal-Mart, valued by 
Wall Street at $236bn (£121bn). The nation's biggest chicken processor, Tyson 
Foods, is just down the road.

On first impression, it feels like the back of beyond. The airport is not even 
named after a city: it is called North-West Arkansas regional airport. You 
approach its modest passenger terminal on a winding country road with one lane 
in each direction.

The state capital, Little Rock, is three hours' drive to the south. Only 
slightly closer, to the west, is the nearest metropolis of any size: Tulsa, 
across the state line in Oklahoma.

In estates with names such as The Pinnacle and Stone Manor, double-fronted 
mansions are arranged on landscaped parkland dotted with swimming pools. 
Wal-Mart has truly put the area on the map and the essence of its founder, Sam 
Walton, seems to be embedded in the soil.

At Carrabba's Grill, an Italian restaurant opposite my hotel, the barman, 
Eric, is a student at the Sam Walton business school in the nearby college town 
of Fayetteville. His father works at Wal-Mart's head office.

"There are people round here who had shares when Wal-Mart was nothing," he 
says. "They're worth millions now."

Some of Walton's views seem to have taken root. Eric agrees that Wal-Mart 
isn't fond of unions but asserts: "Unions are run by mafia types. They won't 
give you a break."

I get a distinct impression that this part of Arkansas is Mike Huckabee's 
evangelical heartland of the state, rather than Bill Clinton's liberal version. 
Churches the size of shopping malls are dotted around the valleys. The county, 
Benton, is dry; there aren't supposed to be any public bars. To get a drink in 
a restaurant, you have to sign in at the door and become a "member".

Wal-Mart's annual meeting brings 20,000 people here every year, according to 
thelocal paper 
<http://www.nwaonline.net/articles/2008/06/04/news/060508azwmcommimpact.txt>. 
Many of them are Wal-Mart employees from around the world, including a 
contingent from Britain's Asda chain, who are put up in University of Arkansas 
dormitories. A local karaoke bar, called You Know? Uno!!, has been
enthusiastically pitching <http://www.youknowuno.com/events.shtml> for the 
visitors to try a few songs other than the Wal-Mart company chant.

A large dose of razzamatazz accompanies the meeting, along with a pinch of 
oddness. This year, Wal-Mart has laid on concerts by the country singer Keith 
Urban, the Hispanic star Juan Luis Guerra and the American idol winner Carrie 
Underwood.

The cut-price retailer cannot please everybody, though. A marching band from 
the local Siloam Springs high school went on the local television news to 
complain that, having played at the last 10 shareholders' meetings, it was 
being given the cold shoulder by Wal-Mart, which now wants to use "hourly 
labour" for entertainment.

On the eve of the meeting this year, Wal-Mart invited the media to take tours 
behind the scenes at a couple of its superstores. There were presentations 
about the company's engagement with the environment and about its laser-like 
focus on low prices.

Some impressive initiatives are under way. Local stores are harvesting 
rainwater and using it to water drought-tolerant gardens. The company is 
cutting back on plastic "clamshell" containers for its products and replacing 
them with biodegradable cardboard. A new online initiative provides cash 
rewards for customers who send back unwanted electronics for recycling or 
resale.

But there were one or two moments of Wal-Mart peculiarity. At a branch of the 
giant's cash-and-carry chain, Sam's Club, an executive named Jill 
Turner-Mitchael described herself as the "mom family segment leader", 
explaining that she was in charge of groceries. She displayed a shopping 
trolley of a typical American housewife's purchases.

The trolley contained peanut butter, crisps, ketchup, coffee, nuts and 
raisins, cinnamon rolls, baby food, cooking oil, toilet rolls and a frozen 
dinner. When asked if there was anything remotely healthy in the trolley, Jill 
pointed to some bottled water and a packet of frozen shrimp.

She shrugged, admitting: "[The average] mom talks a lot about the health and 
wellbeing of her family but this is a typical shopping basket."
 