
"Want to see heavy horses at work?" ask Peter and Jackie Taylor the second we 
arrive at our cottage. The horses won't be ploughing after 6pm, so there's no 
time for a brew.

Tim disappears up the hill with Peter followed by me and Jackie. We could do 
with a couple of shires to pull us up - it's like a cliff face, but we crest 
the hill and enter a field, where two beauties the colour of soaked sand are 
steadily pulling a plough followed by vegetable grower, Brian Cavendish.

The reason the Taylors are so keen for us to see Brian in action is that he 
supplies organic produce - and it's a big part of self-catering at Well 
Cottage, the barn they have converted beside their farmhouse.

The quality of food options here surpasses most I have encountered. Tea, 
coffee, milk are included, but you can order more provisions in advance from an 
online service in which Jackie is a partner (see top tip). There is also a 
ready-meal service, devised with local chefs, and lastly - we're trying this 
tonight - a chef will cook for you in situ.

First we explore our new house, hunkered into a hillside which hugs the 
village of Herodsfoot. A large terrace and a field are in front (complete with 
goats, Blossom and Baptista). Out the back, we can see Jackie's new raised 
vegetable beds.

It's an upside-down cottage. Dining room, shiny new kitchen with everything we 
need plus a table and pine settle, and sitting room with French doors to the 
terrace are at entrance level; downstairs are two double bedrooms, each with a 
bathroom (mmm, nice handmade soap), a utility room and - get this - mini gym 
and sauna. It is a house for grown-ups (no under-14s) with two suites plus a 
sofabed for two more in the dining room, off which is a small shower room.

"There's too much brown everywhere," reckons Tim. I must admit, I can't get my 
head around the current ubiquity of dark leather seating in rental cottages. 
Mainly because I slide around when I'm trying to slob out on a sofa, but also 
it absorbs light. No matter, we're in the bright kitchen when Iain the chef 
arrives, armed with Brian's veg, bass landed at Looe, and new potatoes. 
"They're very early this year," Iain says.

Iain can be booked for a private masterclass here, or to cook a celebration 
six-course dinner (honeymooners last time, apparently). The dining room is 
aglow with candles tonight - but we stay put and watch our very own chef at 
work, while nibbling canapés. It's like BBC's Saturday Kitchen.

Dinner is sublime in its simplicity. Chef lets red Russian kale and tiny 
leeks, pan-fried fish and boiled potatoes speak for themselves, with the merest 
addition of a light beurre blanc. We're so full we ask him to leave pudding - 
lemon tart - in the fridge.

We start next day with a sauna, followed by a woodland walk from the doorstep 
then reading outside in the spring sunshine, but with more time, we'd visit 
Looe's fish market and head off to explore the beaches at Lantic and Lantivet 
Bays.

Deal: Several restaurants in Looe offer Well Cottage residents discounts - the 
details are in the cottage info.

Top tip: Food4myholiday.com <http://www.Food4myholiday.com> delivers organic 
Cornish produce and other provisions anywhere in the county.

• Coombe Farm, Herodsfoot (01579 320147, wellcottagecornwall.co.uk 
<http://www.wellcottagecornwall.co.uk>). Sleeps up to six. Nightly rates from 
£70- £210, minimum three nights (four nights June-Aug; short breaks bookable 
even in high season). Food packs from £49.95, meals service from £4.75. 
Personal chef, £100 (plus food, from £25 per head for three courses, canapés, 
truffles) including washing-up of course.

sally.shalam@theguardian.com <http://www.sally.shalam@theguardian.com>
 