
I love it when the British and Chinese leaders get together. You have two 
entirely different cultures both pretending to be much the same. It's all quite 
baffling and rather amusing. As whenDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> came to the Foreign Office 
with the Chinese premier, Wen Jiabao.

Mr Cameron talked about dialogue. Apparently the big thing is going to be 
people-to-people dialogue, and he didn't mean "number 27 with egg fried rice, 
please". We are to get together on a personal level to understand our new 
friends. Especially young people, because they are the future. The Chinese 
young people will be very polite and talk to our young persons about 
calligraphy and gymnastics. Our young people will drinkmai tai until they are 
off their skulls.

But that is to come. In the meantime, Mr Wen said he had good news for his 
dear friends in the press". He was giving a pair of giant pandas to Edinburgh 
zoo. Not more bloody pandas, I thought. They never mate and they do very little 
except sit around looking grumpy.

These particular pandas have been announced before. They are like Gordon 
Brown's spending on the NHS – the more often you announce each grant, the more 
generous you look. This was just pandering.

Then came questions. We held our breath. Adam Boulton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton> of Sky News asked when China 
was going to make progress on human rights.

Mr Cameron flannelled quite well: "Different countries, different history, and 
different stages of development." Fair enough: 400 years ago, if our leaders 
didn't like someone, they chopped off their heads.

Mr Wen looked thunderous. He glowered balefully at Mr Boulton. He spoke, at 
him, very slowly, like a headmaster with a recalcitrant boy, as if saying: "You 
have let me down, you have let yourself down, and worst of all, you have let 
the Chinese people down."

We half-expected him to tell Boulton that he had now been condemned to death 
in absentia. If he ever came toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
he would be shot, and the bill for the bullet sent to Rupert Murdoch.

The answer seemed interminable. Prime minister's questions in the Chinese 
parliament must be very monotonous. They can never get past question one.

When we got the translation it turned out he was indeed very cross. Mr Boulton 
should spend much more time in China. He should travel by bus and metro (as 
senior Communist party officials doubtless do all the time). He, Mr Wen, had 
visited many of China's 2,800 counties. Unlike the wretched Mr Boulton.

The Chinese people had a history going back 5,000 years. They had undergone 
"untold sufferings", and this had taught them never to address other countries 
"in a lecturing way".

I took this to mean, "You bastards gave us the opium wars, and now you hector 
us on human rights! Just shut it, will you?"

Mr Cameron tried an "old Chinese saying". It didn't matter if a cat was black 
or white, so long as it caught mice.

Mr Wen (who went to Stratford-upon-Avon on Sunday) said that as a boy he had 
loved William Shakespeare and had read Twelfth Night, King Lear and Othello.

Proof that youth culture really is totally different in the two countries.
 