
I am sad to record that my friend Wendy Leigh has died. She fell from the 
balcony of her London apartment beside the Thames andher body was found on 
Sunday morning (29 May). 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/02/wendy-leigh-best-selling-biographer-of-david-bowie-and-jfk-dies/>

From the first moment I met her in the early 1980s, when she arrived in my 
office at the Sun without an appointment but with a disarming display of 
chutzpah, I realised she was a one-off.

She had already achieved a measure of success, and notoriety, with her 1978 
book, What makes a woman GIB (good in bed).

At the time she was planning to write another steamy tome and wanted to write 
it in collaboration with the Sun. Published eventually in 1984, The Infidelity 
Report: A modern epidemic also proved successful.

She moved on from sex manuals to write a series of celebrity biographies, most 
of which antagonised her subjects. But they were always scrupulously researched 
and full of interesting psychological insights.

Her output was amazing. Her books were regularly serialised in newspapers, 
which delighted her because she always considered herself to be a journalist.

Wendy was intelligent, uninhibited and perpetually smiling. Whenever she took 
on a project she became wholly focussed and followed up every hint to ensure 
she interviewed as many people as possible who knew her latest subject.

By exercising considerable charm, combined with steely determination, she 
often persuaded the most reticent of people to talk to her.

She had a short, but vivid, love affair with the Daily Mirror’s owner, Robert 
Maxwell. I remember being amazed when she first told me and was even more 
wide-eyed when she confided the details of their relationship.

Courting notoriety, she wrote about the affair following his death in 1991. I 
noted that she did not reveal all she had told me, and I will continue to 
respect her confidence.

My wife Noreen Taylor, a journalist with the Daily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>, also became friends with 
Wendy when she was covering the 1991 Kennedy-Smith rape trial in Florida. 
Wendy, who had been doing extensive biographical research, generously opened 
her contacts book for Noreen. It was a typical gesture.

We also got to know her then husband, Steve Karten. After 19 years together, 
the couple split in somewhat acrimonious circumstances. ButI see on his 
Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/stephen.karten> a wonderful and loving 
tribute to her:

“She was the most positive person I’ve ever known; glass always half full; 
totally upbeat. She was also brilliant. When we’d be working journalistically, 
I would sometimes stop to observe her, and marvel at her intelligence, 
sensitivity, kindness, dedication, speed of her writing, and the quality of her 
work.”

They worked alongside each other, and he recalled the time they rented a house 
in Aspen to finish work on one her best-selling books, a biography ofArnold 
Schwarzenegger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger> that 
revealed his father’s Nazi past:

“One day, she wrote 6,000 words. I then started editing her work... and was 
amazed at the quality of what she wrote. I always said that I could never equal 
her, and that I felt privileged to know her, and have her as my partner.”

Some of the original reports of Wendy’s death have presumed that she took her 
own life. They refer to the fact that, nine days before her death, she wrote on 
Facebook: “Five months today since my mother, Marion, died. I wish I could say 
it gets easier, but the truth is quite the reverse’.

She also wrote: “Missing her more than I can say, but I know I was lucky to 
have had her as my mother.”

It is certainly true that they were extremely close. In conversation, she 
often raised her mother’s name and the tribulations she had suffered as a 
child. A Jew born in Berlin*, almost all of Marion’s family perished in the 
holocaust.

But Steve cannot believe the reports suggesting she leaped from her balcony. 
“I can’t state emphatically enough how I don’t understand how she could 
possibly commit suicide... I’m devastated.”

And her agent, Daniel Strone, in speaking about her to People magazine 
<http://www.people.com/article/wendy-leigh-dead-suicide-author>, called her “an 
eternally optimistic and upbeat person.”

Nor can my wife and I believe the suicide claims. She just loved life so much. 
As I said, she never stopped smiling.

*In the original posting, it stated that Wendy’s mother was born in Vienna. In 
fact, that was her father’s birthplace. Apologies for the error.
 