
Towards the end of John Ford's classic western, The Man Who Shot Liberty 
Valance, after James Stewart has taken the entire film to explain that it is 
not he who should be credited with killing the outlaw of the title but rather 
John Wayne, the newspaperman he is speaking to shakes his head. Stewart is 
wasting his time trying to set the record straight, he says, and tells him his 
paper works on the following basis: 'When the legend becomes fact, print the 
legend'. Wayne's character, who represents the heroic Old West, is now dead, 
and Stewart's clean, respected senator reflects the new civilisation; times 
have changed, truth is irrelevant. 'That,' the journalist concludes, 'is the 
way things are in the West.'

Ansel Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams> was a 
photographer who made it his business to print the legend; he was a cross 
between the journalist and Wayne - a sharpshooter who dealt in nostalgia and 
promoted the monumental qualities of the landscape around him.

While Adams was taking pictures, Wayne was making films in which he stood for 
a West that was still wild, but always honourable. The movies he made in the 
1930s, '40s and '50s were set in a mythical nineteenth century, when the land 
seemed never-ending and polite society had not yet come to ruin it. They were 
always about the loss of something, or the last of something, and the last was 
usually Wayne. Joan Didion, who first saw him on screen in 1943, later wrote 
that 'when John Wayne rode through my childhood, and perhaps through yours, he 
determined forever the shape of certain of our dreams ... In a world we 
understood early to be characterised by venality and doubt and paralysing 
ambiguities, he suggested another world, one which may or may not have existed 
ever but in any case existed no more: a place where a man could move free, 
could make his own code and live by it'.

Wayne westerns were shot, with sound, in the great outdoors. They were about 
the earth itself. When Wayne walks off into the desert at the end of John 
Ford's The Searchers, the landscape is framed by the doorway of a home: the 
family has been rescued, and the vastness outside apparently tamed as Wayne 
goes back to his world. Ford made Monument Valley his own - it was not simply a 
setting but provided, as Philip French has suggested in his book on the 
western, a 'moral universe', rugged and uncompromising. The landscape was never 
just a landscape, it was part of a human code on the verge of extinction.

As Didion and the journalist in Liberty Valance suspected, none of this world 
ever really existed. It was a retrospective construction or heat-induced mirage 
- a legend become fact. But that was the way things were in the West: many 
subscribed to the idea, and amongst photographers, none subscribed to it more 
than Ansel Adams.

Adams was bron in San Francisco in 1902, when it was still a frontier town, 
only 52 years after it became part of the United States. He was, like Wayne's 
cowboys, unschooled beyond the age of 12, a hyperactive child who couldn't 
concentrate on lessons but whose father gave him, by way of further education, 
a year-long pass to the 1915 San Francisco World's Fair. He visited almost 
daily and saw mechanical exhibits and art from various nations. But his first 
love dawned on him a year later when he went on a family holiday to the 
Yosemite Valley. He climbed, and took photographs with a Kodak Brownie. Years 
later, he married a girl who lived in Yosemite, and returned there, year after 
year, to capture what he called its 'silver light'.

In the nineteenth century, artists visited the Far West as members of huge 
expeditions: Albert Bierstadt, a painter-pioneer who was one of the first to 
turn to the Rockies and Yosemite instead of the Alps to depict the sublime, 
travelled with a railway survey expedition in 1859. To the so-called cultivated 
world, this was uncharted territory. Sometimes the expeditions would include 
photographers - Carleton Watkins in Yosemite and the Sierra Nevada, William 
Henry Jackson in Yellowstone. And because the photographers were supposedly 
documenting the landscape as it was, the painters were free to depict it with a 
certain amount of imagination: Bierstadt's canvases were ideal and theatrical - 
he had found, he said, a 'Garden of Eden', and critics wrote of his paintings 
that they were not so much landscapes as a form of portraiture. They were 
hyper-real in their detail, but also slightly fictional, an assembly of perfect 
parts. Inspired by Bierstadt's paintings, the landscape architect Frederick Law 
Olmsted drafted a bill to preserve Yosemite Valley as a national park. This was 
during the Civil War and, persuaded by Olmsted's report that the area might 
soon become corrupted, President Abraham Lincoln quickly passed the bill into 
law.

Adams espoused this myth of adventure, even though he was working almost a 
century later, and came to know the park better, perhaps, than the back of his 
hand. Like the subjects of contemporary westerns, he sought to preserve the 
pioneer spirit when it was no longer there. He was a man of the West, who wore 
a Stetson and a bolo tie even when visiting New York's Metropolitan Museum and, 
positioning himself as the Californian counterpart to Alfred Stieglitz in New 
York, he spent his life promoting the West as a subject and venue for serious 
photography. For many years, he led Sierra Club outings of up to 200 people 
into the mountains. And he was an influential teacher of photography; he 
invented a system of exposure and development, and he wrote about how his 
photographs were created, offering detailed technical tips, but also telling 
the stories behind them, as if the idea of the photographer as explorer were as 
important as the images themselves.

On 17 April, 1927, Adams went climbing in Yosemite with friends. 'We started 
up Le Conte Gully,' he wrote, 'under the north cliff of Grizzly Peak ... 
patches of snow and ice remained in the recesses of the rocks, and a chilly 
wind flowed over us from the high regions above. It was an exhilarating and 
promising morning, and we were cheered to meet the sun after a hard, cold climb 
in the frigid shadows.' So far, the entry reads as though he were a more 
physically intrepid version of Byron or Shelley. Then Adams describes the 
suspense involved in taking a picture there: 'The morning wind troubled the 
camera, and I waited for a lull that would permit a four-second exposure ... I 
did not have much space to move about in: an abyss was on my left, rocks and 
brush on my right... I had only one plate left and was aware of my poverty ... 
I knew I had an exceptional possibility in my grasp...' The result was the 
extraordinary brooding cliff-face of 'Monolith: the Face of Half Dome'.

Adams would boast about his prowess and the danger: in his youth there were no 
climbing techniques, he said, and 'in earlier days I could climb thousands of 
feet, on or off trails, carrying a back pack load of 50 or 60 pounds, with the 
ease and abandon of a mountain goat'. When he went to Death Valley he slept on 
the camera platform on the roof of his car. He ate reheated beans and tinned 
hash, and walked through the dunes in temperatures of more than 90 degrees to 
capture the sunrise. He carried a number of cameras and lenses and filters and 
glass plates, and had a 10x8 view camera for 'pack-mule excursions'.

But the sense of adventure wasn't the only part of nineteenth century 
landscape painting that Adams was prolonging. He favoured large-scale prints 
(specifying that some worked best at 40x50 inches) and he also reinvented the 
sublime for photography: no matter how at one he was with nature, many of his 
subjects, as his photographs showed them at least, were never there.

It seems counter-intuitive to say of photography that its subject never 
existed, since the point about the medium in the first place was that, unlike 
painting, it never lied. But, in the manner of the Old West of the movies, 
Adams's subjects were inventions. (Many of Adams' picture captions sound like 
westerns, and his first portfolio shared half its title with a Raoul Walsh 
movie, High Sierra.) His initially controversial 'Zone System' advocated 
overriding the instructions on the film label. The purpose of this was to show 
people how to photograph not what they saw but what they felt. 'We should have 
some idea of what our picture is to be,' Adams instructed, 'not only 
compositionally, but in terms of ... how we feel about our subject.' Though 
they seem naturalistic at first sight, Adams' landscapes are artificial. Skies 
are black in the photos when in reality they were blue or even white ('Two Dead 
Trees, Sierra Nevada', 'Old Faithful Geyser, Yellowstone National Park'). 
Russet forests are turned, as if in a fairy tale, to silver ('Aspens, Northern 
New Mexico').

Didion, a native of California, wrote of that region that it was 'a place... 
in which the mind is troubled by some buried but ineradicable suspicion that 
things had better work here, because here, beneath that immense bleached sky, 
is where we run out of continent'. That was the place Adams photographed: the 
end of the earth, not as it looks but as it feels - grand, insistent, yet 
fragile. Unimaginably dangerous but of paramount importance, a last chance.

Adams was criticised for not showing the world as it was, for not documenting 
or aiming to change anything. During the Depression and the War, while Dorothea 
Lange was in the dust bowl and Margaret Bourke-White was in the concentration 
camps, there was old Adams, measuring the light in Yosemite again. 
Cartier-Bresson complained of him: 'Now in this moment, in this crisis, with 
the world may be going to pieces - to photograph a landscape !' It's arguable 
though that what Adams was doing was ultimately political - working in the 
service of conservation.

In any case, his project was personal, and life-long. 'The longer I worked in 
Yosemite and the Sierra Nevada, the more convinced I became that the inclusive 
landscapes - striking as many undoubtedly are - may not interpret the direct 
excitement and beauty of the mountain world as incisively as section, fragment, 
and close details ... Landscape photography can be an intimate art form not 
necessarily dominated by the grand, remote aspects of the world or the passing 
excitement of events.' Just as Albert Bierstadt and John Huston had made 
portraits of an idea of America, of the West as a character, in showing how he 
felt about these places - and how he felt was increasingly intimate - Adams was 
making self-portraits. If Huston saw in Monument Valley a moral universe, then 
Adams found in Yosemite himself. His pictures represented an emotional tie - a 
sublime sense of danger, but also triumph and pride as he conquered the peaks. 
As he photographed those places over and over again, they showed, for Adams, 
how the West was won.

&#183 Ansel Adams at 100 is at the Hayward Gallery, London SE1, 11July-22 
September
 