
The taxi from Plymouth station turns into a street between terraced houses. 
"There it is," says the cabbie, pointing at a narrow stone jetty, "the Cremyll 
ferry." Moments later I'm sitting aboard the Tamar Belle, a sharp wind stinging 
my cheeks as she surges across the river which divides Devon and Cornwall. 
Ahead, the wooded outline of the Rame peninsula is growing fuzzier by the 
minute as dusk turns to night. It feels like a mini adventure, and by the time 
we reach the far shore, I'm already chilled out. Dylan McLees Taylor, who runs 
Westcroft B&B with his missus, Sarah, is waiting at the quayside to take me to 
the village of Kingsand.

Moments later we are winding through streets little wider than alleyways. 
Houses lean together, hugger-mugger, as if shielding secrets of Kingsand's 
past. There's a whiff of smuggling, secret passageways, press gangs and rum 
goings-on. I've been transported to another world.

Then we're inside Westcroft, Sarah chatting, Edie the English pointer giving a 
sniff of approval. The house is narrow and tall. I lose count, on our way to 
the summit, of the landings and ledges, magically aflicker with tea lights in 
coloured glass.

One double room is next to a twin - the two work well for families, Sarah 
tells me. The uppermost double, mine, is called the Clock Tower Suite. In this 
eyrie beneath the roof I have a daybed piled with chocolate brown cushions, and 
one of those curved French beds. Through a distressed painted doorway, I can 
see the bathroom, tiles of slate, complete with Neal's Yard distinctive blue 
glass bottles (high time they created a guest-size range for hotels).

Tempting as it is to switch on the LED floor lights and splash about for an 
hour, I have an appointment with a lady called Sheila - who brings her pink 
towels and healing hands to your room. By the time Sheila has packed up, I'm 
feeling very floaty, which is amazing considering you don't even lie down for 
an Indian head massage.

Dinner cranks up the feelgood factor further. It's a 10-minute journey to chef 
Matt Corner's restaurant, The View, and what its spartan interior lacks, the 
cooking makes up for - steamed mussels in shallots, white wine and garlic, and 
an utterly sublime saddle of roast venison with apple and fig compote.

Emerging from sleep beneath a pile of pillows and cushions, I don't need the 
footstool provided to peep out of the Velux windows and gaze across a patchwork 
of rooftops to the clock-tower and the sea. Downstairs I pull on walking boots 
to join Sarah and Edie on a brisk trot through the woods on the other side of 
town, perching midway on a bench to munch croissants fetched first thing from 
the shop by Dylan.

Proper breakfast is at a circular table painted with the points of the compass 
in jolly red, yellow and blue. I'm surrounded by seascapes, too - overspill 
from Westcroft Gallery, Sarah and Dylan's other business in an airy annexe 
across the courtyard, where they sell work by Cornish artists. If a picture 
takes your fancy they'll put it in your room so you can get to know it better 
before making a commitment.

Neither Sarah nor Dylan has run a B&B before, but they're so good at this. 
Twenty-four hours in Kingsand, and I'm a new person.

Best for Sybarites, but amazingly also child- and pet-friendly.

• Market Street, Kingsand, Cornwall (01752 823216, westcroftguesthouse.co.uk 
<http://www.westcroftguesthouse.co.uk>). Rooms from £90 per night, Clock Tower 
Suite from £100. Dinner at The View (01752 822345), from approx £19.50 for two 
courses.
 