
Western Sydney’s Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> defence remains 
on track after a 1-1 draw with FC Seoul but they missed a golden opportunity to 
take a major step towards progressing to the knock out phase.

Kerem Bulut gave the Wanderers a dream start before Go Yohan equalised late, 
brilliant saves by both keepers ensuring the scores remained level in a 
frenetic finish.

With both sides equal on points behind group leaders Guangzhou Evergrande, a 
win at Parramatta Stadium would have put the Wanderers in the box seat to 
progress with the top two teams to go through.

Instead the Wanderers remain in second spot but only ahead of the Korean side 
on goal difference. Their next match against bottom-placed Kashima Antlers at 
home in a fortnight now looms as a must win for the reigning champions to go 
through.

Bulut gave the Wanderers the perfect start when a Iacopo La Rocca long ball 
caused panic in the box, the striker taking full advantage to put the hosts up 
1-0 in the 12th minute.

Labinot Haliti had two great first-half opportunities to double the advantage, 
his first shot off a back-pass going well wide before also missing with a 
diving header from point-blank rage off a great Anthony Golec ball.

FC Seoul looked like levelling just before the break when Everton Santos was 
released on the left, but the Brazilian couldn’t convert. Yun Illok also 
threatened a minute later but Wanderers keeper Ante Covic was rarely troubled 
in the opening half.

The Wanderers where lucky to retain their lead when Colombian Mauricio 
Molina’s powerful strike hit the crossbar in the 52nd minute.

Eager to add more firepower up front, Tony Popovic brought on Socceroo striker 
Tomi Juric for Haliti with just under half an hour remaining. But the Koreans 
would score next with substitute Go’s sensational strike off a Santos ball 
levelling the score in the 72nd minute.

Bulut went in search of a second goal launching on a Yusuke Tanaka ball to 
drew a great save from keeper Kim Yong Dae five minutes later. Wanderers fans 
were left irate in the dying minutes when Juric was brought down in the box, 
the referee waving play on.

Covic pulled out perhaps the save of the match in the dying minutes, the 
keeper airborne to diffuse a heavily deflected volley with replays showing he 
took the ball over the line with him.

Molina and Myong-Jin Koh also tested Covic with just moments left on the 
clock. Kim was also under fire at the other end denying both Romeo Castalan and 
Jason Trifiro in the dying stages.
 