
What will the Middle East make of Donald Trump? The flamboyant New Yorker is 
building a $1.1bn (£550m) hotel on the luxury Palm Jumeirah development off the 
coast of Dubai, where Premiership footballers rub shoulders with international 
statesmen and billionaires.

It is The Donald's first foray into the region and it will be in typically 
understated style -the building is shaped like a rocket 
<http://www.trumpdubai.com> which, to some, might seem rash for an American 
symbol in a turbulent part of the world.

"I don't view it as a rocket," Trump said at a briefing for international 
media this week. "I just view it as a sensational piece of architecture."

A penthouse at the top of the hotel has been priced at $30m, with an interior 
designed by Kelly Hoppen who was in New York for the building's launch with her 
boyfriend, the celebrity hairdresser Nicky Clarke. Tactfully, Clarke declined 
to answer persistent questions from reporters over what improvements he could 
make to Trump's elaborate blonde comb-over.

As Trump met the press in a conference room at the top of his Trump Towers 
landmark overlooking Central Park, he let slip a peculiar moment of personal 
paranoia. The flamboyant developer spotted a cameraman leaning against a glass 
window and urged him to move away on the grounds that the pane might break, 
sending him hurtling 25 floors to the pavement.

"I saw that happen once at a party at the GM [General Motors] building and let 
me tell you, it wasn't pretty," said Trump. "It might be a one in a million 
chance but it can happen."

This warning was oddly disconcerting, coming from the mouth of a man who 
builds skyscrapers for a living.

A sign of the times, wind-up or clever piece of street art?

A smartly dressed young-ish man with a grey suit and an immaculate tie has 
been pounding the pavements of Manhattan in a sandwich board reading: 
"Experienced MIT graduate for hire."

The resourceful fellow, who goes by the name of Joshua Persky, says he has 
been unable to find work for six months. He previously worked as a consultant 
for the investment bank Houlihan Lokey and for Fortis Capital.

"It's a very difficult market," Persky told the New York Sun 
<http://www.nysun.com/business/out-of-work-banker-employs-unusual-job-search>. 
"Instead of sitting at home, writing emails and networking, I decided to come 
out and hit the streets and try to compete a little."

Persky says he has a wife and five children to support. His family are moving 
back to their home state of Nebraska, leaving him in the Big Apple seeking the 
means to be the breadwinner.

When I left a message on the phone number advertised on his sandwich board, 
Persky's wife, Cindy, called back and said the strategy had been successful – 
Persky has an interview with a bank and several other leads.
"It was a bit humiliating for him at first but it's gotten him a lot of 
attention," she said. "There are a lot of people in his boat right now and 
you've got to do something to stand out."

Poor fellow. These are tough times - Citigroup has been busily handing out 
redundancy notices this week as it aims to cut 10% of its 65,000-strong 
workforce.

Even a former finance chief of a major industrialised power is struggling to 
get a job. Peter Costello, the former treasurer of Australia, has been 
unsuccessfully hawking his talents around a clutch of cash-strapped banks 
including Citi according toThe Australian newspaper 
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,23906404-601,00.html>. 
Maybe he should try a sandwich board.

Poor take-up for GTA class action

There was a slap in the face this week for a bunch of American class action 
lawyers who sued the makers of Grand Theft Auto (GTA) on the grounds that the 
hugely popular computer game contains a hidden sex scene likely to shock and 
upset its users.

Millions of people have bought the San Andreas version of the inner-city crime 
game since it was launched four years ago – but only 2,676 have applied for 
compensation of between $5 and $35 to help them overcome their distaste of its 
unseemly content.

Through a simple hacking mechanism widely available on the internet, gamers 
can get their characters to fornicate – a ruse no doubt installed by an 
over-zealous programmer at manufacturer Rockstar Games.

When a group of plaintiffs kicked up a song and dance, the manufacturer agreed 
to a cash settlement which was set to cost $1.3m but is in fact amounting to 
just $30,000 because nobody seems bothered enough to claim.

"Am I disappointed? Sure," Seth Lessen, the lead lawyer for the plaintiffs, 
told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/25/technology/25settle.html?_r=1&scp=2&sq=grand+theft+auto&st=nyt&oref=slogin>
. "We can't guess as to why now, several years later, people care or don't 
care."

The censors upped the minimum age for GTA players from 17 to 18 when the 
game's sexual content emerged. Now another lawyer, Theodore Frank, is seeking 
to overturn the settlement on the grounds that the original case had no merit.

The NYT notes that in the normal course of playing GTA, users can kill 
policemen, encounter prostitutes and steal money from the corpses of murdered 
pedestrians. Perhaps it's not surprising that GTA's customers suffered little 
mental trauma from a secret sex scene.

 