
Q One of my new year resolutions is to save a bit more for the future. I 
reckon I could afford to put aside £100-£150 a month. Any suggestions?

A Regular savings are an easy and efficient way of building a nest egg. You 
simply set up a standing order or direct debit to fund your chosen investment 
and hardly notice the money paid out each month.

At present, several major banks are offering regular savings accounts with 
what appear to be very high interest rates, ranging between 7% and 12.5% a year 
gross. But the terms and conditions attached to the accounts make the real 
return on your savings a lot lower. The interest rate quoted is what your 
savings would earn if they were in the account for a whole year, so only the 
first deposit earns the full rate.

The subsequent regular payments during the next 11 months receive a gradually 
reducing rate - 11/12ths of the quoted interest rate in the second month down 
to 1/12th in the last month. The average monthly return over the 12-month 
period is therefore well below the high rate paid on the first instalment. If 
you opted for the account paying 12.5%, over the course of the year the total 
return on your money would be around 6.7%.

The regular savings accounts with the highest rates tend to come with a strict 
set of terms and conditions. In most cases you are not allowed any withdrawals 
in the fixed 12-month period, without a loss of interest. The amount that can 
be saved is also restricted between a minimum and maximum on a monthly basis, 
although within these limits you can usually vary your monthly payments if you 
want to. Other common conditions imposed on the star headline interest rates 
are that a minimum amount has to be kept or paid into an account often paying a 
low rate of interest.

Away from the regular savings accounts, most of the best-buy accounts are only 
available online or as telephone-based accounts. You should be able to set up a 
standing order or direct debit to your account so you can easily make regular 
payments from your current account. When you want to withdraw money, online 
bankers should be able to arrange a transfer to your current account yourself. 
If it is a telephone account you will have to call to arrange a transfer.

Risk investments
 Those who are happy to take more risks with their cash could consider a 
monthly savings plan involving an investment fund. Regular monthly savings are 
also a good way of reducing the risks involved with investing in shares, 
because you benefit from what is known as "pound cost averaging". If you invest 
the same amount each month in a share fund, it follows that you will be 
allocated more units when prices fall and less when prices go up. The total 
holding will therefore be made up of more units bought when prices were low 
than when they were high, which will boost the average return over the long 
term.

Setting up regular savings over a long period removes to a large extent the 
danger of guessing when a share price is at a low or high point. You might lose 
out from not investing fully when the price is low in order to make a 
substantial capital gain, but you won't risk buying all of your shares at the 
top of the market.

Regular savings should therefore be most concerned with selecting the right 
fund or share to provide a good return over the required time period. For 
example, if you are taking a long-term view, to boost your retirement income 
you could gamble on a higher risk sector that may well yield a much higher 
return.

Most fund management companies offer regular savings plans, often starting at 
£50-£100 per month. Investment trusts, which are effectively funds listed on 
the stock market, are particularly good for long-term regular savings as the 
dealing costs are normally very competitive. Many unit trusts and open-ended 
investment companies also offer the option of making regular monthly 
investments, instead of a lump sum payment. You can often reduce the costs 
associated with these types of investments by buying them through an 
internet-based fund supermarket.

Reducing tax
 Whether you wish to opt for cash savings or an investment fund, you can use 
your individual savings accounts (Isa) allowance to house your money and reduce 
the tax payable on it. Over a tax year you are allowed to put up to £3,000 in a 
mini cash Isa, plus £4,000 in stocks and shares, or up to £7,000 in a maxi 
stocks and shares Isa.

Many people wrote off Isas when the chancellor removed the income tax 
concession on share dividends, but cash and fixed interest Isas are free of 
income tax, and share-based Isas can benefit considerably from the continued 
freedom from capital gains tax.

With the 2006-07 tax year due to end on April 5, you should make sure you have 
used your Isa allowance to the full amount. But be careful - if you forget to 
stop a direct debit paying into an Isa before the end of the tax year you will 
find yourself locked into the same savings plan for the next 12 months.

Another important tax-effective investment for regular savings is a pension 
plan. You can now invest an amount equivalent to up to 100% of your annual net 
earnings each year, up to a maximum of £215,000 in the current tax year. If you 
already have a personal pension you can top it up with regular monthly 
payments. Or, if you are in a company pension scheme you can get tax relief on 
payments to an additional personal scheme providing you don't exceed the 
£215,000 limit.

Using up your annual pension allowance is not as important as in the past, 
because the regime is more flexible than it was. Nevertheless, pension funds 
have a tremendous tax advantage that makes them very attractive for regular 
savings.
 