
Terence Conran

My favourite summer dish: Simple roast lobster with fresh aïoli

Sir Terence Conran, restaurateur extraordinaire, spends as much of the summer 
as possible in Sicily with his extended family, which includes his 
brother-in-lawAntonio Carluccio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonio-carluccio>.

Roast lobster with aioli

Serves 2

For the lobster:

1 x 500g live Dorset or Scottish lobster
 a drizzle of good olive oil
 a glug of white wine
 a teaspoon of very mild fresh thyme, optional
 a lemon, to serve

For the aïoli:

2 or 3 cloves of garlic, peeled with any green bits removed
 a squeeze of lemon juice
 scant tsp Dijon mustard
 2 egg yolks
 approx 8 tsp very good olive oil

Purists tend to make aïoli in a pestle and mortar - this is up to you. Bash 
the garlic up with the lemon juice and mustard - remember you don't want to 
actually taste the mustard, so don't overdo it. Whisk in the egg yolks gently 
but thoroughly.

Start adding the oil very slowly and whisking as you go - be careful as aïoli 
is very prone to misbehaviour. If it seems too thick, add some more oil very 
gradually. If the mix separates then whisk up another yolk with some lemon 
juice in another bowl and add the split mixture to it, whisking as you pour. If 
all else fails, add a splash of boiling water and whisk again.

Preheat the oven to 220C/gas 7. Don't try to cook a lobster that is much over 
500g as they tend to be tough, as do the Canadian varieties. Split the lobster 
briskly straight through the head and body with a knife so as to minimise 
needless suffering. Remove the stomach sac from the head and any gritty bits 
you can see. Cut off the legs and crack the shells slightly with the handle of 
the knife. Place the legs in a roasting pan, and the body on top, 
cut-flesh-side up. Drizzle over a splash of olive oil, season and add the wine. 
If you wish, sprinkle on a tiny bit of thyme but this is very much optional and 
if it's at all strong don't use any. Cover the pan and blast in the oven for 8 
or 9 minutes. Once cooked, lift the lobster out of the pan carefully, and 
deftly slide the whole thing on a plate. Scoop up the pan juices and pour on 
top, with lemon juice to taste. Serve with the aïoli and a green salad perhaps, 
or some chips.

· Recipe by Jeremy Lee, head chef at the Blueprint Cafe

Antonio Carluccio

My favourite summer dishes: Chilled melon soup

It took an Italian to show us Brits how to make a restaurant chain stylish and 
its menu simple and delicious. Take a bow, Antonio Carluccio of Carluccio's 
Caffès ...

Zuppa di melone e prosciutto (melon and parma ham soup)

This used to be a bestseller in my Neal Street restaurant. It's a wonderful 
way to enjoy parma ham and melon. It adds another dimension to summer eating. 
The blend of a little orange and lemon juice gives it a special spiciness.

Serves 4

1 x 1.5 kg very ripe cantaloupe or charentais melon (orange flesh is essential)
 juice of 1 orange
 juice of 1⁄4 lemon
 1⁄2 tsp sea salt
 1⁄2 tsp coarsely ground pink peppercorns
 sugar to taste
 4 large slices parma ham, cut into thin ribbons

Peel and liquidise the melon to a coarse purée. Stir in the orange and lemon 
juices. Season with salt and pink pepper and add sugar to taste (this should 
not be necessary if the melon is ripe and flavoursome). Mix in one quarter of 
the ham and divide the soup between four bowls. Sprinkle the remaining ham onto 
the soup and serve with a final twist of the pepper grinder on top.

Mark Hix

My favourite summer dishes: A fruity oatmeal dessert

Mark Hix's number is on the A-list's speed dial. As chef-director of the Ivy, 
Caprice, J Sheekey - and, most recently, Scott's - he oversees the kitchens of 
London's most fashionable restaurants. He has a passion for British food - Hix 
has written several books on the subject - and was a hit on BBC's Great British 
Menu.

Cranachan with raspberries

This dessert is dead simple to make and it's full of flavour. You can use any 
soft fruit really, but raspberries - because of their size and sweetness - are 
perfect. I did try using Drambuie instead of whisky since I had some lying 
around, and it worked pretty well. I've used this recipe occasionally as a 
breakfast dish and replaced some of the cream with yoghurt.

Serves 4

60g medium oatmeal
 150g raspberries
 600ml double cream
 4tbs runny honey
 4tbs malt whisky

Scatter the oatmeal on a baking tray and toast in a low oven or under a medium 
grill until golden. Watch it closely or it may burn.

Blend 50g of the raspberries in a liquidiser until smooth. Whip the double 
cream until stiff, then stir in the honey and whisky and mix well but do not 
over-whip. Fold in 50g of the oatmeal, then carefully fold in the raspberry 
purée to form a rippled effect. Spoon the mixture into individual glasses or a 
serving dish, then scatter the rest of the raspberries and oatmeal on top.

Angela Hartnett

My favourite summer dishes: A classic Italian salad

Angela Hartnett is Britain's best female chef. Having worked in many of Gordon 
Ramsay's restaurants worldwide - she trained alongside the great man - she now 
runs the GR kitchen at the Connaught hotel in London and is about to launch her 
TV-chef career.

Tomato, mozzarella and basil salad

While this classic Italian salad appears on menus everywhere, very few places 
make it well - often because they use cheap, rubbery mozzarella and watery, 
chilled tomatoes. The quality of the tomatoes in the UK is often pretty poor, 
so at the Connaught we roast the tomatoes in order to concentrate the flavour.

Serves 4

8 ripe plum tomatoes
 8 ripe cherry tomatoes, halved
 2 tbs olive oil, plus extra for drizzling
 salt and freshly ground black pepper
 2 tbs sugar
 leaves from 6 sprigs thyme
 1 garlic clove, sliced
 2 x 125g balls buffalo mozzarella, sliced
 1 bunch fresh basil, ideally with small leaves

To prepare the plum tomatoes, make a little incision with a sharp knife in the 
top of each one. Bring a pan of salted water to the boil and blanch the 
tomatoes in it for 10 seconds.

Drain and plunge immediately into a bowl of iced water - this will make the 
skins easier to remove. Peel and cut in half lengthways. Remove all the seeds 
with a teaspoon. Preheat the oven to 120C/gas 1⁄2.

Prepare a roasting tin just big enough to hold all the tomatoes: drizzle a 
tablespoon of olive oil inside, then sprinkle in salt, pepper and half of the 
sugar. Place the tomatoes in the tin, cut side up, in one layer. Drizzle with 
the remaining tablespoon of olive oil and sprinkle with salt, pepper and sugar. 
Scatter the thyme leaves and garlic slices over and around the tomatoes. Bake 
in the oven for 1-2 hours until the tomatoes begin to shrivel up. Halfway 
through the cooking time, turn the plum tomatoes over and remove the cherry 
tomatoes. Mix the tomatoes in a bowl with the mozzarella and basil. Serve with 
a drizzle of olive oil.

· From Angela Hartnett's Cucina (Ebury Press)

Tom Parker Bowles

My favourite summer dishes: An English and a Laotian salad

In foodie circles, Tom Parker Bowles is known as Tom, the food writer rather 
than Tom, son of ... And so he should. For his latest (and excellent) book he 
ate water beetles and dog in the name of research. He writes a column for the 
Mail on Sunday and appeared on Market Garden with Tana Ramsay.

An English lettuce salad

This recipe comes from Simon Hopkinson's classic, Roast Chicken and Other 
Stories

Serves 4

6 eggs, whites cooked, yolks raw

For the dressing:

2 tsp sugar
 salt and cayenne pepper
 2 tsp dry English mustard
 1 tbs tarragon vinegar
 300ml whipping cream
 1 tbs fresh tarragon, coarsely chopped

For the salad:

6 fresh round lettuce hearts, separated into leaves, washed and dried
 12 thin spanking-fresh spring onions, trimmed and sliced into 3cm lengths
 12 radishes, washed, halved and put into ice cold water for 30 minutes to 
crisp up
 cucumber, peeled and sliced not too thinly
 a few mint leaves, torn to shreds

To make the dressing, whisk together the egg yolks, sugar, seasoning, mustard 
and vinegar. Add the cream and tarragon and mix. Arrange the ingredients for 
the salad in a large shallow dish. Sprinkle over the chopped egg whites and 
spoon over the dressing in dribbles and swirls.

Minced meat salad, based on a Laotian larb salad

This is my own recipe based on larb gai. It's a minced meat salad, often raw 
and not too spicy. The key, as ever, is to balance the sweet, sour, salty and 
pungent. In Laos, this would always be served with sticky white rice.

Serves 2

125g chicken stock (use fresh or very good-quality stock cubes)
 big pinch white sugar
 250g skinless chicken thigh and breast, minced by hand
 5 tbs fresh lime juice
 1 tbs fish sauce
 2 fat pinches of dried chilli powder (dry-roast dried red chillies until 
slightly seared, then crush in a pestle and mortar)
 5 chopped bird's-eye chillies, optional (not authentic in this dish but if 
you want more heat, these will do the job)
 6 Thai shallots, thinly sliced
 handful mint leaves and sweet basil, torn
 2 big pinches of roasted rice powder (dry-fry sticky white rice until golden 
then pummel to a powder in a pestle and mortar)

Heat the stock to simmer, add the sugar then add the chicken, simmering for 
about 4 minutes until cooked through. Then add the lime, fish sauce, chilli 
powder, and fresh chillies (if using) shallots and herbs. Cook for a further 
minute then taste. It should be hot, sour, slightly sweet and salty. Adjust to 
taste and serve, sprinkled with the rice powder.

Mark Sargeant

My favourite summer dishes: Squid with olives and avocado and cucumber soup

Mark Sargeant is Gordon Ramsay's right-hand man - not only is he head chef at 
Claridge's but he's also masterminding Ramsay's new gastropub venture.

Squid with olives

This is a simple way to cook baby squid. The vinaigrette imparts a zesty 
flavour and helps to tenderise the squid.

Serves 4

250g (about 6-8) baby squid, cleaned
 50g black olives
 50ml extra-virgin olive oil
 50ml groundnut oil
 juice of 1⁄2 lemon
 sea salt and black pepper
 handful of flat-leaf parsley, roughly chopped

Rinse the squid and pat dry. Slice the body into thin rings and place these in 
a saucepan with the tentacles. Add the olives, oils, lemon juice and seasoning. 
Slowly bring the liquid to the boil, then immediately turn off the heat. Cover 
and leave the squid to continue cooking in the residual heat of the 
vinaigrette. The squid is ready when it turns white. Stir the chopped parsley 
through the squid then, with a slotted spoon, transfer to a serving bowl. 
Drizzle over a little of the vinaigrette to serve.

Avocado and cucumber soup

Use really ripe avocados to give this soup a rich green colour.

Serves 4

2 large cucumbers, about 400g each, chilled
 juice of 1 lemon, or to taste
 2 ripe avocados
 2 tbs Greek yogurt
 1 tbs Worcestershire sauce
 sea salt and black pepper
 1⁄2 red onion, finely chopped
 1 plum tomato, deseeded and finely chopped
 1 tbs olive oil, plus extra to drizzle
 3-4 basil leaves, finely shredded

Peel the cucumbers, quarter lengthways and remove the seeds. Dice a quarter 
and set aside for the garnish. Roughly chop the rest, place in a blender with 
half the lemon juice and whizz until smooth.

Halve, stone and peel the avocados. Finely chop one avocado half to use for 
the garnish. Squeeze over a little lemon juice and set aside with the diced 
cucumber. Tip the rest of the avocado into the blender. Blend the avocados with 
the puréed cucumber, Greek yogurt and Worcestershire sauce until very smooth. 
Season generously with salt and pepper, and add lemon juice to taste. Chill 
until ready to serve.

For the garnish, combine the diced cucumber and avocado with the red onion and 
tomato. Toss with the olive oil and shredded basil. Taste the chilled soup for 
seasoning and add a splash of cold water if it is too thick. Pour into four 
chilled bowls and spoon the garnish into the centre. Add a drizzle of olive oil 
and grind over a little pepper to serve.

· From Gordon Ramsay's Fast Food - Recipes from The F Word (Quadrille)

Mourad Mazouz

My favourite summer dishes: A salad of scallops, mozzarella and spicy 
strawberry juice

Mourad Mazouz first became a fixture on London's party scene when he launched 
Momo, his Moroccan bar and restaurant, and Madonna decided to throw a party 
there on the first night. Since then he has also opened the equally glam (and 
Michelin-starred) Sketch.

Scallops, mozzarella di buffala and spicy strawberry juice

Serves 4

250g fresh strawberries
 15g black pepper
 2 limes, juice and zest
 2 mozzarella di buffala
 100ml good-quality olive oil
 5g sea salt
 8 grissini sticks
 romaine lettuce
 120 extra-large fresh scallops (clean and out of the shell)
 30g butter
 10g honey

For the spicy strawberry juice, clean the strawberries, quarter them, and add 
a pinch of the ground black pepper, and 1 lime's juice and zest. Cover the mix 
with clingfilm and cook it slowly in a bain marie for 1 hour. Strain the mix 
and then keep the clear juice in the fridge to cool it down. Put in shot 
glasses with crushed ice.

Cut each mozzarella in two and season them with a good olive oil, sea salt and 
black pepper. Arrange on a cold plate with the grissini. Clean the lettuce. Cut 
it into strips and reserve on the side. Season the scallops with fine salt on 
both sides. Heat up some olive oil on a non-stick frying pan. Throw in the 
scallops for 40 seconds on one side and then 20 seconds on the other.

Take the pan off the heat and add the butter. Deglaze the scallops with lime 
juice and season with pepper, lime zest and sea salt. Glaze the other side with 
honey and dress them on a round, flat plate. Add the salad to the scallop pan 
briefly to warm and coat with the juices.

Place on a plate, add the scallops and serve with the mozzarella and 
strawberry juice.

Tom Aikens

My favourite summer dishes: Cod and chips

The talented Tom Aikens, of the eponymous Michelin-starred restaurant and 
Tom's Kitchen in London, has a rival - his identical twin brother and chef, 
Rob. This autumn the twins are opening a chippie, Tom's Place, in Chelsea.

Fish and chips

Serves 4

For the thick-cut chips:

450g King Edward or red Desirée potatoes 
oil, for frying

For the fish:

4 x 100g fillets of cod or whiting 
50g flour

For the batter:

300g high-gluten bread flour, such as T55, used in French bread making 
60g cornflour 
15g sugar 
11⁄2 tsp sea salt and 1⁄4 tsp white pepper 
500ml Heineken lager 
30g dried yeast

For the tartar sauce:

4 egg yolks
 10g English mustard
 1g freshly ground black pepper
 5g salt
 750ml vegetable oil
 good dash lemon juice
 15g white wine vinegar
 2 tbs water
 75g chopped gherkins
 75g chopped capers
 10g chopped parsley
 75g chopped shallots

To make the chips, peel the potatoes and then cut them into 1cm square batons 
the length of the potato so they are all the same size. Wash the starch off the 
potatoes then place them in a pan of slightly salted water and bring to a rapid 
boil. Chill immediately in cold water . Dry them off well and then plunge into 
the oil at 140C to blanch them for 2-3 minutes, then drain. Heat the oil to 
180C then plunge the chips into the oil for 3-5 minutes, or until they are 
golden; season with sea salt.

To make the batter, place the flours and seasoning in a bowl. Mix the other 
ingredients together and leave to stand for 10 minutes. Make a well in the 
flour, pour in the liquid and whisk thoroughly to avoid any lumps.

To make the tartar sauce, whisk the egg yolk, mustard, pepper and salt in a 
bowl, then slowly pour on the oil, whisking well. Keep adding the oil (you 
might need to add a little water to the mayonnaise as it may get too thick). 
Add the rest of the ingredients

Dip the cod in the flour then in the batter. Fry at 180C until golden and 
serve with the chips and tartar sauce.

· Tom Aikens: Cooking (Ebury Press)

Nigel Slater

My favourite summer dishes: Quail and rosewater and cardamon ice-cream

Nigel Slater is the award-winning cookery writer - and The Observer's 
much-loved (and down-to-earth) foodie columnist. He is the author of many 
cookery books plus Toast, his memoir told through his most memorable meals. 
This October he publishes Eating for England

Flattened quail, chilli, salt

This recipe comes from River Café Two Easy, by Rose Gray and Ruth Rogers 
(Ebury).

Free-range quail are slightly larger with much more flavour than farmed quail, 
but they are hard to find. Don't bother trying to flatten the tiny, farmed 
quail - they are too small and will dry up on the grill.

Serves 4

4 dried chillies
 2 lemons
 12 organic quails
 4 tbs sea salt
 24 thyme sprigs
 extra-virgin olive oil

Preheat the barbecue, griddle pan or grill. Crumble the chilli and halve the 
lemons. Dry the quail with kitchen paper, and lay breast-down on a board. With 
a pair of scissors, cut out the backbone and discard. Press and flatten the 
birds. Rub with sea salt and dried chilli.

Place the quails on the preheated grill breast-side down, scatter over the 
thyme and grill for at least 5 minutes. Turn and cook for a further 5 minutes. 
Serve with a drizzle of olive oil and the lemons.

Rosewater and cardamom ice cream

This recipe, taken from the Moro Cookbook (Ebury), is one of my favourites. 
The ice cream is not to everyone's liking, but those who appreciate the 
heavenly scent of rosewater will adore it. The addition of gum mastic, a resin 
from a tree native to Greece and Turkey, makes it even more exotic.

Serves 8

2 tbs whole green cardamoms
 600ml milk
 600ml double cream
 1 cinnamon stick
 160g caster sugar
 230ml rosewater
 3 crystals gum mastic, crushed with 1 tsp caster sugar (optional)
 1 x 400ml tin evaporated milk
 dried rose petals, to decorate (optional)

Lightly crush the cardamom pods with a mortar and pestle, and pick out as much 
of the green pod as you can, leaving behind the small black seeds. Pound these 
seeds to a fine powder.

Pour the milk and cream into a large saucepan, then add the ground cardamom 
and cinnamon stick. Bring to the boil and simmer over a medium heat, stirring 
occasionally, until the liquid has reduced by about a quarter and has turned a 
rich creamy colour similar to evaporated milk (around 20 minutes).

Meanwhile in a small saucepan, dissolve the sugar in the rosewater over a low 
heat and simmer until a thin syrup is formed. Remove from the heat and allow to 
cool.

When the milk and cream are ready, remove from the heat, strain out the 
cinnamon and discard. Stir in the crushed gum mastic (if using), and cool for 
10-15 minutes. Add the evaporated milk and combine with the rosewater syrup. 
Churn in an ice-cream maker. Serve decorated with dried rose petals if you have 
them.

Michel Roux Jr

My favourite summer dishes: A spicy crab salad and chocolate brownie with 
pistachio ice cream

Marathon runner Michel Roux has two Michelin stars for his cooking at the 
brilliant Le Gavroche in London.

Spicy fresh crab salad

Serves 6

600g white crab meat
 1 large avocado, diced
 2 spring onions, sliced thinly
 juice of 2 limes
 1 tbs sesame oil
 salt
 Tabasco sauce
 200g brown crab meat, pushed through a fine sieve
 watercress, to garnish

Crab is my favourite seafood - I think all the work involved in picking the 
meat out of the shell makes it taste even better. The best way to cook a crab 
is to drown it first: just submerge it in cold fresh water for 5 minutes and it 
will gently pass away. Cook it in boiling salted water for 18 minutes (for a 
large 2kg crab). If all this seems like too much work, buy the best quality 
picked claw meat - fresh, not frozen or pasteurised.

Put the white crab meat in a bowl and add the avocado, spring onions, lime 
juice, sesame oil, salt and Tabasco. Mix gently with a fork; do not overmix as 
you should keep the delicate flaky texture of the meat.

Place one spoonful of the brown meat in six individual serving dishes, then 
divide the white meat mixture between the dishes. Serve garnished with 
watercress.

Hot cherries with chocolate brownie and pistachio ice cream

Serves 10

300ml red wine
 120g caster sugar
 800g cherries, stoned

For the chocolate brownies:

275g extra bitter chocolate, chopped, and a little extra to serve
 225g unsalted butter
 400g caster sugar
 1 tsp vanilla essence
 a pinch of salt
 5 eggs
 200g plain flour

For the pistachio ice cream:

6 egg yolks
 120g caster sugar
 500ml full-fat milk
 30g pistachio paste
 30g peeled pistachios, roughly chopped

Bring the wine and sugar to the boil, add the cherries and boil for 20 
seconds, then remove the cherries. Boil the liquid to reduce until syrupy. 
Return the cherries to the syrup and keep warm.

For the chocolate brownies, heat the oven to 150C/gas mark 2. In a large bowl 
set over a saucepan of simmering water, melt the chocolate and butter together 
and then whisk in the sugar, vanilla and salt. Beat in the eggs, two at a time. 
Fold in the sifted flour. Pour into individual buttered baking rings (7cm in 
diameter and 2cm deep) and bake for 12 minutes, until set on the outside but 
undercooked inside.

To make the ice cream, whisk the egg yolks with half the sugar in a large bowl 
until thick and creamy. Bring the milk and remaining sugar to the boil. Remove 
from the heat, add the pistachio paste and stir to dissolve. Pour the hot milk 
into the yolk mixture and stir well. Return the mixture to the saucepan and 
stir over a low heat until the mixture thickens enough to coat the spatula. 
Chill, then strain the mixture into an ice-cream maker and churn until frozen. 
Stir in the chopped pistachios and freeze until required.

To serve, decorate the plates with a little melted chocolate. Place a brownie 
on each plate and arrange the hot cherries and syrup around. Finish with a big 
scoop of ice cream and a few chopped pistachios.

· From Le Gavroche Cookbook, by Michel Roux Jr (Weidenfeld & Nicholson)

Ruth Rogers

My favourite summer dishes: Tomato soup and grilled salmon

Ruth Rogers runs the Michelin-starred River Café with her friend and fellow 
chef, Rose Gray. Ruth, wife of architect Sir Richard, is passionate about 
unfussy Italian food. It was the River Café that introduced Tuscan peasant food 
to the chattering classes and got us all hooked on cavelo nero.

Pappa al pomodoro

This may be my favourite soup, especially in late summer when tomatoes and 
basil are at their best. Use open-textured white bread made with olive oil, 
such as pugliese.

Serves 10

4 garlic cloves, peeled and cut into slivers
 175ml olive oil
 4kg ripe sweet tomatoes, skinned and seeded, or 2kg tinned plum tomatoes, 
drained of most of their juices
 sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
 4 loaves stale pugliese bread
 1 large bunch basil
 extra virgin olive oil

Put the garlic and the olive oil into a heavy saucepan and cook gently for a 
few minutes. Just before the garlic turns brown, add tomatoes. Simmer for 30 
minutes, stirring occasionally, until the tomatoes become concentrated. Season 
with salt and pepper, then add 600ml water and bring to the boil.

Cut off most of the crust of the bread and break into large chunks. Stir into 
the tomato mixture until the bread absorbs the liquid, adding boiling water if 
it is too thick. Remove from the heat and allow to cool slightly. If the basil 
leaves are large, tear up. Stir the soup with 120-175ml of the olive oil. Allow 
to sit before serving to let the bread to absorb the flavour of the basil and 
oil. Add more of the oil to each bowl and serve.

Grilled whole side of salmon

Serves 8

1 wild salmon, 4kg, trimmed and filleted 
extra-virgin olive oil 
2 lemons, cut into quarters

Preheat a grill, griddle pan or barbecue. Season both sides of the salmon and 
rub with olive oil.Place it, skin-side down, on a grill and cook for 4 minutes. 
Turn over and grill for a further 3 minutes. Drizzle with olive oil, cut into 
thick slices, and serve with lemon quarters.

Read part two <http://www.observer.co.uk/foodmonthly/story/0,,2129229,00.html> 
of this story
 