
I love cooking, but I'm a working mum and pregnant, so by the evening I have 
no desire to cook. I'd like to make meals ahead of time so I can have a healthy 
dinner during the week. Can you suggest a meat-free idea?

Katherine Carr, London

So many things make cooking at home more of a chore than a pleasure. Let me 
suggest a versatile dish that will keep for 3-4 days in the fridge: a terrine 
of potatoes, pasteurised goat's cheese (or feta) and leeks.

To feed four, you'll need six medium waxy potatoes, such as charlottes; 400g 
of goat's cheese and six leeks. Cook the potatoes and, while still warm, remove 
the skins and slice thinly. Splash with a little olive oil, then season with 
salt and pepper. Split the leeks lengthways, wash them and remove most of the 
root, but leave enough to hold it together. Drain well and stew whole with a 
little butter in a covered pan or steam until cooked through. Crumble the 
cheese in a bowl. If you are pregnant, you should avoid eating the soft goats' 
cheese (chèvre): pasteurised goat's cheese or hard cheese made from goat's milk 
should be safe to eat, or substitute for feta.

Line your terrine mould (a loaf tin will do) with a double thickness of 
buttered clingfilm, allowing excess to fold over the top. Begin and end your 
layering with potatoes and pack the ingredients in tightly: use cheese to plug 
the gaps between potato slices. Fold the film over the last layer of potatoes. 
Place some weight on the terrine and refrigerate overnight. The next day it 
should feel solid and be easily removed from the tin.

To serve, dust 1cm-thick slices of terrine with seasoned flour and fry for 1 
minute on each side. Cut as much as you need and keep the rest for later. You 
can have it a few nights on the trot; just add a fresh accompaniment, such as 
beetroot tartare, bacon (if you're feeding meat-eaters), fresh salad, some 
purple sprouting broccoli or spinach, to keep your palate excited.

• Sonya Kidney is a chef and the owner of Soda delicatessen, Oxfordshire

• This article was amended on 5 February 2013 to make it clear that pregnant 
women should not eat mould-ripened soft goat's cheese (chèvre) as this is made 
with mould that may contain listeria, a type of bacteria that can harm unborn 
babies. Hard cheese made with goat's milk, or pasteurised goat's cheese can 
still be eaten or feta can be used instead.
 