
Another milestone: Amol Rajan has become the first non-white editor of 
a mainstream national newspaper,taking the helm at the Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/17/amol-rajan-independent-fleet-street>
. No bunting. Perhaps that's a good thing. But for those who remember what a 
novelty it was to have another non-white face in the newsroom, it's a big deal. 
So what next?

I hope Rajan, who is of Indian origin, will have time to become good at the 
job and then perhaps to excel at it. But just as much, I hope he doesn't suffer 
from the frenzied expectations that greet the appointment of any minority to a 
powerful or high-profile position. He is one guy. He can't achieve critical 
mass on his own.

What should we expect – if anything – when a person from a minority takes a 
mainstream leadership role? Should we see them as a kind of advance party for 
everybody like them? Or is their contribution just the breaking of the mould? I 
conduct a snap poll. I start with a friend who is Jewish, and he says he 
expects nothing much when someone Jewish gets a big job because there are 
already a fair few successful people in top jobs. "I might be pleased that 
they've got it and there'll be a story in the Jewish Chronicle because it has 
happened, but I don't feel they'd be weighed down by expectations. It depends 
on the community and its progress. It has taken us 100 years to achieve what we 
have. Other minorities have only had 50 or 60."

I consult another friend, a gay activist. It is right to have expectations, he 
says, adding that whether or not people meet them can be generational. From 
some who have risen while downplaying their "cultural inheritance" you expect 
and get nothing. But younger high-fliers, he says, seem more confident about 
allowing who they are to impact on their work, reflecting more liberal times. 
"It's about being professional and using your cultural intelligence for the 
benefit of the organisation," he says.

And what of Linda Bellos, diversity consultant; black, lesbian and leader in 
the 1980s of Lambeth council? She hails Rajan. But what does she expect? "We 
should have no expectations," she says. "Other than that he will be a 
consummate journalist, with knowledge of the minority experience and that he'll 
give that due regard."
 