
Q I have an endowment policy with Standard Life, which is likely to fall well 
below the target for repaying my mortgage. I have held onto it in order to 
qualify for the "windfall" from the flotation of the company. However I am now 
considering selling it and would like to know whether this is a good idea and 
what are the options?

A A huge rise in the number of Standard Life with-profits policies being 
surrendered is expected once customers have received their windfalls following 
the insurer's flotation.

Policyholders wanting to get out because they are unhappy with the performance 
of their endowment policies - or simply because they want some money - have a 
choice.

One option would be to stop paying the premiums and make their policy a 
paid-up one, hoping that it will gain in value by the maturity date in spite of 
the heavy charges. Other options would be to surrender the policy direct to the 
insurance company in return for a lump sum (the surrender value), or to sell it 
on the "second hand" market by assigning the policy (now known as a Tep: a 
traded endowment policy) to a third party in exchange for a lump sum payment.

To cash or not to cash
 The question of whether or not you should cash in an endowment policy depends 
very much on your individual circumstances: for example, whether you are 
confident that you can repay your mortgage by other means - perhaps by trading 
down your property. Or perhaps you feel the money could be put to better use - 
either in other forms of investments or simply to pay for a world cruise.

An important point to remember is that if you surrender the policy, you will 
lose the life insurance cover, which could be quite costly to replace as you 
get older or if you are ill.

If you do decide in favour of cashing in your policy, the first step is to ask 
the insurance company for a surrender value. As well as giving you this 
information, it is obliged to tell you that there is a second-hand market 
available on which you may be able to sell your policy.

Selling on your policy might provide you with a sizeable premium above the 
surrender value, which is normally set at a low level because the insurance 
company is anxious to retain your money.

Tips of the trade
 Once you have obtained the surrender value, the next step is to contact one - 
or several - of the companies dealing in second-hand policies. The Tep market 
has grown enormously in the past 20 years or so. Originally there was only one 
company that auctioned life policies, but during the 1980s a large number of 
private market makers were formed to buy and sell endowment policies directly, 
without going through the auction system.

During the stock market depression, demand for second-hand policies - as for 
most other investments - dropped to a low level, and the prices offered were 
often not much above - or even below - the surrender values.

In recent years, though, the Tep market has been transformed by a surge in 
demand, mainly from institutional investors and especially in Europe, where 
with-profit funds are not generally available. It is estimated that the market 
has a current annual turnover of £500m a year.

Institutions are attracted by having a "safe" core investment for their funds, 
with the prospect of a steady return, while private investors are drawn by the 
prospect of acquiring a ready-made investment with the bulk of the charges 
having already been paid in the early years. A Tep is a savings plan with a 
"lock in" value made up of the sum assured plus the accrued annual reversionary 
bonuses, which cannot be taken away. So there is little or no risk of losing 
money.

If you are lucky enough to pay less than the "lock in" value then you are 
guaranteed a profit. In most cases, investors are likely to pay a premium to 
the "lock in" value in the hope that over the years there will be sustained 
return over and above the premiums which are paid by the new owner of the 
policy.

Private investors can cover school and university fees - or provide additional 
retirement income - by buying several Teps maturing over a period of years. 
These can be cashed in using the investor's annual capital gains allowance, 
allowing the proceeds to be received tax-free.

One problem in terms of long-term planning is that if the original 
policyholder dies, the policy matures immediately. However, in most cases, the 
policy simply runs to maturity at a known date.

Where to go
 There are six main companies who are members of the Association of Policy 
Market Makers, which is regulated by the Financial Services Authority (FSA) and 
has code of conduct. They account for something like 95% of the total Tep 
market. There are also some smaller market makers not regulated by the FSA, who 
trade through independent financial advisers for compliance purposes.

Market makers claim that current demand for Teps considerably exceeds supply. 
They are confident that the expected huge flow of Standard Life policies can 
easily be absorbed, although a really large volume of extra sellers might 
result in a drop in the premium paid above the surrender value.

Currently, the average premium paid is between 5% and 15% above the surrender 
value, although it could be a lot higher for the "right" kind of policies: 
namely, those which are in most demand. Don't be fooled by any of the 
extravagant claims of premiums over 30%: that is most unusual.

The ratio of premium to surrender value varies considerably according to the 
size of the accumulated "lock in" value, the length of the policy until 
maturity, and the status of the insurance company. Normally, market makers 
insist that the policy has a surrender value of at least £3,000 and has been 
running for a period of five years. The highest premiums are paid for policies 
with 10 to 15 years to run before maturity.

Some market makers will only buy policies if they have a matching buyer. 
Others like to build up large portfolios of policies, providing a choice for 
potential buyers. All of them may turn their noses up at policies from 
insurance companies who are financially weak and may fail to provide a decent 
return. However, that is not the case with Standard Life, whose policies in the 
past have often earned an extra premium on the secondhand market.

It is definitely worth looking around for competitive offers because some 
market makers may have lots of potential buyers prepared to pay higher prices. 
Names of the different market makers can be easily obtained via the internet. 
You can obtain competitive price offers to get an idea of how much your policy 
is worth compared with the benchmark surrender value, and you do not have to 
commit yourself to sell. Alternatively, you can go to the Association of Policy 
Market Makers' website,www.APMM.org <http://www.APMM.org>, which also provides 
useful background information.
 