
What’s the point of budget repair if 725,000 Australians are unemployed and a 
further 1,067,000 people are underemployed?

At its most basic level, economic policy is about maximising the speed at 
which an economy can sustainably grow to ensure the pool of unemployed and 
underemployed workers is as small as possible.

$4.8bn found down the back of the couch doesn't leave much confidence in GDP 
figures | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/08/48bn-found-down-the-back-of-the-couch-doesnt-leave-much-confidence-in-gdp-figures>
The superficially strong 3.3% annual GDP growth rate in this week’s national 
accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/australia-notches-up-25-years-without-recession-as-public-spending-boosts-growth>
 would normally signal a stronger labour market. The skewing of that growth to 
exports of bulk commodities, where employment is small, means the domestic side 
of the economy is still not growing fast enough to attain full employment.

There was also a significant contribution to GDP from government demand, 
something that flies in the face of the government’s obsession with budget 
repair. It is unclear where economic policy is currently being aimed.

The policy priority is to reduce spending to ensure the deficit is as low as 
possible and to return to budget surplus. Such policies take money from the 
economy and by definition, growth slows and with that, the rate of job creation 
softens and unemployment is higher than it would otherwise be.

The positive influences of expansionary fiscal policy are summed up well in 
the current year 12 high school economics text book (Australia in the Global 
Economy 2016 edition; Tim Dixon & John O’Mahony): “An expansionary fiscal 
policy involving increased spending or tax cuts would accelerate economic 
growth … in stimulating aggregate demand, expansionary fiscal policy can help 
reduce unemployment.” It is base-case economics.

What is concerning is that the current slack – or underutilisation – in the 
labour market is about as severe as during the early 1990s recession. This is 
because the highly flexible labour market, with an increasingly skilled and 
talented workforce, has been limited to achieving annual pay increases of just 
2% – about the same as the low point for wages in and around the last recession 
in the early 1990s.

The duration where the economy has seen sub-2.5% wages growth is longer than 
at any stage during the early 1990s recession. The degree of slack is now 
extreme.

With the unemployment rate having been stuck above 5.5% for four years, it may 
simply be the case that policy makers are complacent about unemployment.

Given a choice between a return to budget surplus in three years, or 
entrenching unemployment below 600,000 people (or 5%) of the workforce, the 
government is choosing the budget surplus.

As the former treasury secretary Ted Evans once noted, policy makers largely 
choose the unemployment rate they wish to live with.

In other words, policies can be implemented that will lower the unemployment 
rate. They may involve spending on education, skills and training, or dealing 
with wage rates and industrial relations reform. Or it could be a simple fiscal 
stimulus where money is injected into the economy in infrastructure building 
programs.

Take your pick if your goal is full employment.

Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> has 
indicated that budget repair is his priority. On the latest projections, the 
existing policy framework has the unemployment rate holding at a high 5.5% over 
the next few years.

If there is any attempt to hasten the return to surplus outside the automatic 
stabilisers, or “repair” the budget via spending cuts, the outlook for people 
without jobs will remain bleak.

The Coalition’s slogan during the election campaign revolved around “jobs and 
growth”. It can deliver on that pledge with some job-friendly policies over the 
next few months but it may mean delaying a return to surplus.

It is likely that many of those now unemployed and underemployed don’t give 
two hoots whether the budget deficit is $6bn or $16bn and would prefer a 
government that was able to provide a framework where more jobs could be 
created.

Stephen Koukoulas is a Research Fellow at Per Capita, a progressive thinktank.
 