
Q My bank's financial adviser has told me my family could face paying 
thousands of pounds in inheritance tax when I die. I also read recently that a 
Labour ex-minister said the tax should be scrapped and the Tories are also 
promising to make some changes if they get elected. What should l do? I have a 
house, which is now worth more than £400,000 (with an outstanding mortgage of 
£50,000), and investments including Peps and Isas worth around £150,000.

A With net assets worth a total of at least £500,000, after allowing for the 
mortgage, your estate would be liable to pay £86,000 in inheritance tax should 
you die tomorrow.

The current inheritance tax exemption threshold is £285,000 and anything above 
that figure - £215,000 in your case - is liable to a 40% inheritance tax charge.

The chancellor has announced plans to raise the exemption ceiling to £325,000 
over the next two years. Nevertheless, primarily because of the steep rise in 
house prices it is forecast that by 2009 up to 3.6m estates will be liable to 
pay inheritance tax.

The tax is hugely valuable to the state coffers, bringing in around £3bn a 
year. Nonetheless, it is unpopular because many people who have paid tax during 
their lifetime dislike the prospect of being hit by a further tax charge when 
they die.

It is true that this is no longer a rich man's tax, as it was in the past. The 
rise in the exemption threshold has over the years been linked to the retail 
price index, and so does not reflect the huge increase in the price of property.

Furthermore, in the last budget the chancellor announced new tax charges on 
trusts, which were previously used to try and reduce inheritance tax.

Tax reduction
 The suggestion by the Labour ex-minister, Stephen Byers, that inheritance tax 
should be scrapped seems a bit of a red herring. Economists have predicted that 
the chancellor would be unable to afford the loss of the rapidly rising revenue 
from inheritance tax.

Nevertheless, political pressure for changes to inheritance tax is building 
because it has now become a cause for concern for a much larger number of 
voters.

Unfortunately, this pressure for change has made planning for those who wish 
to reduce their beneficiaries' tax bill even more difficult because of the 
uncertainty about the future.

Under existing rules you can reduce inheritance tax bills primarily by making 
irrevocable gifts to your chosen beneficiaries, although you must then live for 
a further seven years.

There are also various annual allowances, which are immediately tax exempt. 
You can give a capital sum of £3,000 a year (£6,000 for couples), up to £5,000 
to pay for a child's wedding, and an unlimited number of £150 income gifts.

The problem is that to qualify for the tax exemption, the gifts have to be 
absolutely genuine with no strings attached. Many people are reluctant to make 
such a commitment since you never know when you might need the money in the 
event of some unexpected development.

You can also make additional gifts providing it can be proved to HM Revenue 
and Customs that they are made purely from income and do not affect your 
standard of living in any way. This involves keeping detailed records and 
arranging for regular payments to back up evidence that your standard of living 
has not been affected.

Trust schemes
 The tax charges on trusts announced in the last budget have restricted even 
further the use of trusts in avoiding or mitigating inheritance tax. However, 
two trust schemes are still useful - gift and loan trusts, whereby you keep 
control of the capital and draw income, while any investment growth is tax 
exempt. The problem is that there may be negative rather than positive 
investment growth and it takes a long time before you see any substantial 
inheritance tax savings.

More effective, but more complicated, are what is known as discounted gift 
trust schemes. They can provide instant tax savings but are expensive to set up 
and run. Married couples can still use discretionary will trusts to use both 
their tax-free exemption allowances.

These are particularly popular as a way of allowing the surviving spouse to 
continue living in the marital home. However, they do require couples to change 
the way they own their house - they must become become tenants in common rather 
than the more usual way of joint ownership - and they can be a source of family 
disputes.

It has been known for children to put the surviving spouse under considerable 
pressure to sell their home so as to, for example, release the proportion of 
the value of the house left to the children.

You have to be very careful how any trust scheme is created. Expert advice is 
required from lawyers or financial advisers, both of whom charge large amounts 
of money for their services.

Life assurance

Many people use life assurance policies to cover potential inheritance tax 
bills and preserve the value of their estates for the beneficiaries. This is a 
useful way of avoiding the forced sale of the family home, but the premiums can 
be costly, especially as you get older.

Using your annual allowances to the full is sensible if you can afford it, 
since they provide instant benefits while you are still living. Longer term 
plans are trickier and depend very much on individual circumstances and 
attitudes.

Some people are afraid of giving away too much and putting themselves at 
financial risk just to help their beneficiaries pay less tax.

Another way of reducing a likely inheritance tax bill is simply to spend more 
before you die. Alternatively, home equity plans allow you to raise money for 
your lifetime by using a mortgage or loan, which will reduce the value of your 
estate.
 