
Portugal has never quite evoked the allure of Tuscany or Provence, but I 
suspect that is about to change. While many of Europe's most glamorous spots 
now suffer overcrowding, and a rash of developments have replaced olive groves, 
much of Portugal remains almost untouched. For those prepared to venture off 
the beaten track, there are amazing discoveries to be made - not least the 
sparsely populated Alentejo region. Stretching south from the river Tejo to the 
northern hill ranges of the Algarve, it's home to one of Europe's most ancient 
agricultural landscapes, little changed since Roman times.

My wife and I recently came across a place that seems to encapsulate many of 
those qualities: a former way station for pilgrims now converted into a 
minimalist hotel, set in 1,000 hectares of cork oaks. Monte do Carmo, we felt 
at once, is a place that deserves to be much better known.

There's been a church at Monte do Carmo, near the town of Estremoz, since 
1750, but it was famous as a site of healing miracles for centuries before 
that. In 2006, the family that has managed the cork estate here since 1600 
began converting the abandoned buildings around the church into a hotel that 
combines the best of traditional Alentejo architecture, stone arch windows and 
serene lime-washed walls, with a chic modern edge. The 18 rooms might almost be 
suitable for monks, were it not for their soft beds, spacious baths and Wi-Fi 
connection. Even the restaurant manages to combine simplicity of ingredients 
with a sense of understated luxury.

This is a place in which to appreciate silence. At just over two hours from 
Lisbon, it's well connected to airport and trains, but the Alentejo feels 
blissfully remote. Aside from the birdlife, you're unlikely to hear a sound 
beyond your window.

With its arid climate and poor soil, the Alentejo has never attracted much 
development. Instead, it survives on olive and cork plantations, the latter 
providing the world's principal source of wine stoppers. Stretching for 10,000 
square kilometres, it is one of the most pristine ecosystems in Europe.

The countryside around Monte do Carmo is stunning. Beneath the mighty cork and 
Holm oaks, a blaze of wildflowers catches the eye. Ponds and small lakes rustle 
with bullrushes. And gracing the skies are the prehistoric-shaped black-winged 
storks for whom the Alentejo is a breeding ground.

Although the hotel offers balloon flights, mountain biking and horse riding, 
it's perhaps on foot that the montado, as these cork groves are known, is best 
experienced. They're a mixture of woodland and pasture, centred around the 
Quercus suber, the bark of which is removed in large strips every nine years. 
The Portuguese cork industry has faced difficulties recently due to the 
competition from plastic corks and screw tops. But, as any visit to Monte do 
Carmo demonstrates, it is not merely the livelihood of the corticeiros that 
depends on our choosing traditional corks, it's these unique patches of 
wilderness in the heart of mainland Europe, home to Iberian lynx, booted eagles 
and wild boar.

Despite the hotel being almost full when we arrived, we walked for three hours 
without seeing another soul. But a hare ran across our path and an owl swooped 
down a few feet away.

Back at the hotel, we braved a dip in the chilly swimming pool. A traditional 
pool might spoil the setting, but the hotel got around this by installing a 
sophisticated, chemical-free eco pond, divided beneath the surface into one 
area for swimming and another for plants and tadpoles.

After all our exercise, we were among the first into dinner. Our starters of 
goat's cheese, grassy olive oil, sea salt and olives seemed a culinary mirror 
to the landscape. Each ingredient was intensely pure and concentrated in 
flavour. We followed it with Iberian black pig, long favoured in the Alentejo, 
perhaps because the cork oak acorns provide the pigs' main diet. Washed down 
with Monte Velho wine, it showed that Portuguese food - sometimes considered 
inferior to other European cuisines - can hold its own with the best of them.

Next morning, being Sunday, the tiny church opened up to visitors. It's an 
extraordinary building, apparently rising from the ruins of a pre-Christian 
site, with hundreds of naive ex-voto paintings by pilgrims sprawling across the 
walls. It seemed appropriate that Monte do Carmo should be situated around a 
church, for it has an aura of contemplative silence - ideal for artists or 
anyone fleeing the madding crowd.

If you feel like a change, there's the bustling nearby town of Evora, with its 
bullfights and restaurants. But when you have a thousand hectares of cork 
montado to get lost in, you may find yourself utterly content.

• Monte do Carmo, Azaruja, 7006-901 Evora (00351 266 970 050, 
hotelruralmontedocarmo.com <http://www.hotelruralmontedocarmo.com>, 
belverhotels.com <http://www.belverhotels.com>). Doubles €55 per weekday night 
until July, otherwise around €80, incl breakfast. EasyJet (easyjet.com 
<http://www.easyjet.com>) flies from London Gatwick to Lisbon from £52.98 rtn 
incl taxes.
 