
It’s common knowledge that work in the cultural sector is often underpaid, 
precarious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/apr/23/self-employed-arts-freelance-susan-jones>
 and inequitable. It’s a situation that has only become worse in recent years 
due to the stagnating economy, arts funding cuts, as well as changes in higher 
education funding, where students now carry increasing debt towards a career in 
a sector where jobs are becoming increasingly scarce.

For many young graduates, finding work in this sector also depends on being 
able to undertake one or multiple internships, which are more likely than not 
underpaid or unpaid.

We need to stop assuming students are completely unaware of the nature of work 
in the sector

There is an expectation now that higher education institutions have a role in 
producing “work ready” or “employable” students. As a tutor on an arts 
management programme atBirkbeck <http://www.bbk.ac.uk/front-page>, this is one 
of the constant issues my colleagues and I struggle with as we try to prepare 
students for the challenges of developing a career in the sector.

What students want

So what do young people want from an arts industry education? We worked with 
students and sector pros to answer that question. Through a roundtable 
discussion and workshop session, each group was able to talk honestly about 
issues surrounding work in the sector. Tutors present at both discussions 
thought about how the concerns raised could be turned into a curriculum that 
would better prepare students for work in the cultural sector. The end result 
was a five-week workshop series that contains a list of discussions and tasks, 
some of which are highlighted below, that sought to address the issues raised.

One of the key things we learned is that we need to stop assuming students are 
completely unaware of the nature of work in the sector.

To put it simply: they do know that work in this sector is built on short-term 
contracts and portfolio work. But current career development advice still 
focuses predominately on jobs that are permanent, stable and based on a 
standard, predictable career progression. The continued emphasis on well-put 
together resumes and cover letters being the main tools required when seeking 
employment doesn’t take into account hiring practices in an industry where 
self-employment and portfolio careers are commonplace.

Reflection, experience and expression

We also asked students what they wanted alongside their studies: essentially, 
what concepts or things could we implement that would help them better prepare 
for work in this industry?

The first was a physical space for reflection. The cultural sector is an 
amazing and exciting place to work because of the various types of roles and 
jobs available across so many different artforms. But such an array of 
opportunities can also be daunting when a fresh graduate is trying to find a 
way in.

As a result we developed a series of workshops organised around guest lectures 
and practical exercises to provide students with the opportunity to think and 
work through what it means to be successful or how to deal with failure. It 
sounds conceptual, but it’s invaluable in a sector rife with overnight success 
stories and constant rejection that can often feel more personal than 
professional.

Humour, anger, passion and quirks – life at the sharp end as an arts freelancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/apr/29/arts-freelancer-tips-how-make-it>
The second thing students wanted was experience: somewhere to practice what 
they felt were essential skills needed to obtain work in the sector. These 
skills ranged from how to put together a 10-minute pitch to knowing what your 
employment rights were if you were commissioned for a project or self-employed. 
On this front we invited sector professionals with relevant experience to speak 
to students about how to maintain a portfolio career and how to pitch. These 
talks offered them a chance to link what they had learned in class to practice 
in the field.

Students found these workshop series particularly helpful in providing an 
opportunity for their third want: expression. The workshops gave them a place 
to learn more about how to present themselves both verbally and non-verbally. 
Some of the questions they tackled were:

 * How does one behave in a sector where seemingly anything goes? 
 * Are power suits and court shoes still expected or are sneakers and jeans 
acceptable? 
Being able to speak and meet with people working in the sector offered 
students an invaluable opportunity to see how culture pros conduct themselves.


Next steps

The curriculum we developed is by no means perfect and there are limitations. 
For example, we need to address work internships, still seen by many as the 
standard route to a cultural sector career. Here, we developed a series of work 
placement contracts that, while unable to address inequality of access, 
hopefully mitigate the potential exploitative nature of some of them and ensure 
these internships are genuine learning opportunities for everyone.

That said, we’re still working with practices in a sector that, to an extent, 
does not offer equality of opportunity and whose workforce does not reflect the 
diversity of society. The next step of this work, which will be more difficult, 
is to find a way to challenge current practices in the sector that might 
engender a shift in employment practices.

Lorraine Lim is lecturer in arts management at Birkbeck 
<http://www.bbk.ac.uk/front-page>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 