
"Looking back at prison I really wish I'd done something on the education 
side," says Martin, 25. He did three terms in jail: three months as a juvenile, 
another term of two years, and a further six months.

Was there anything on offer at the prisons that interested him? "Yes, there 
were things, but not stuff that was really interesting to me. And it wasn't 
offered freely, you had to go and investigate it yourself," he explains.

As a young prisoner coming to terms with being locked up, Martin says he was 
not in the right frame of mind to consider doing a course, and there was nobody 
in his family or among the prison staff to give him the support he would have 
needed to overcome his reluctance.

Seven years after leaving prison, Martin sounds worn down and fed up. He can't 
train in the construction skills he would like to learn because he can't afford 
to lose his jobseekers' allowance. And without any qualifications to show 
employers, his prospects look bleak.

Martin's story is typical. More than 50% of male offenders and 71% of female 
offenders have no qualifications. Nearly half have literacy skills at or below 
level 1 and 65% have numeracy skills at or below level 1.

It is hardly surprising, then, that finding employment on release is 
difficult: 67% of offenders were unemployed when they went to prison and more 
than three-quarters had no job to go to when they got out.

Using a prison term, even a short one, to gain useful skills seems a good 
opportunity to allow ex-prisoners to make a fresh start. But for prisoners on 
short sentences, the odds of being able to start, let alone complete, an 
educational course are stacked against them.

A report from the National Skills Forum, Doing Things Differently: Step 
Changes in Skills and Inclusion, highlights a range of barriers inmates 
typically face.

The major problem identified is known as "churn". This involves prisoners 
being regularly transferred, often without notice, from prison to prison, and 
results in an abrupt halt to any educational course that a prisoner has 
embarked on.

"The cohort of prisoners who serve less than 12 months tend to be the ones 
with the lowest educational levels," says Pat Jones, director of the Prisoners'­
Education Trust. By the time a prisoner has done their induction, she observes, 
they are a couple of weeks into their sentence. They are then often transferred 
and have to begin another induction. Then they must be allocated to a class 
list, at which point they will most likely have to slot into a course that has 
already started.

"So, for anyone on a very short sentence," she says, "it's a huge challenge."

Maria McNicholl, a manager at the St Giles Trust charity responsible for 
­prisons projects, says: "The average stay in a London prison is four weeks. So 
any ­prolonged educational activity that requires consistency is virtually 
impossible."

Not only does this mean that individuals often cannot complete any 
qualification they have embarked on, but their motivation to begin a new one is 
severely compromised, and the money already invested in their training is lost.

According to the National Audit Office, a third of courses started in prison 
are not completed, half of these as a direct result of prisoner transfer. The 
cost of that wastage comes to £30m a year.

St Giles Trust, which trains inmates to be NVQ level 3-qualified peer 
resettlement advisers, becoming expert in housing, benefits and jobseeking, 
asks prison governors to put the transfers of anyone studying for the 
qualification "on hold". But the pressures on prison beds means that it is 
difficult to envisage it happening across the board.

Losing track of learning records when inmates move prison is a further barrier 
to their progression that was highlighted by the report. It is hoped that a new 
pilot, Virtual Campus, which gives prisoners access to online learning and 
creates a record of achievement, will help with continuity, although one prison 
manager quoted in the inquiry said a lack of computers might limit progress.

Weak

Then there is the problem of overcoming prison culture. "Studying is seen as 
weak in some people's eyes, and to protect yourself you have to put on a 
front," explains Martin.

Gordon Marsden MP, who co-chaired the National Skills Forum inquiry, says 
there must be a culture change in jails, and outside, to encourage prisoners to 
pursue educational goals.

"Evidence suggests that education has been seen as part of a privilege regime. 
We need to move away from that, and see it as offenders preparing themselves to 
be useful people in the outside world, and as a part of rehabilitation," he 
says.

"One of our recommendations is that education should be integral to 
sentencing, and that education should be central to the prison regime."

Targeting people on short sentences, who have the lowest skills levels, will 
require creative thinking and real commitment to change existing practice, says 
McNicholl.

Focusing on education for people who are in and out of jail is perhaps not a 
vote winner. But, says Marsden, society cannot afford to neglect this group, 
"because the cost of looking after people in prison, compared to the cost of 
making them productive people, is a no-brainer."
 