
Throwing myself into living as female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, I 
anticipated the difficulties of'passing' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> in 
public. I was less prepared, however, for the barrage of questions in more 
private spaces. I soon realised that being expected to field invasive 
questions, often from strangers, is as much a part of the 'real life 
experience' as handling abuse in the street, and one reason why so many 
transsexual people aspire to live in 'stealth'.

I was reluctant to cover this, primarily as I thought I couldn't address it 
better thanCalpernia Addams <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DjqsB1huDxg> (and 
partly because readers might think I'd stolen her idea). But the reason why her 
video resonates with so many transsexual people is because of the frequently 
encountered assumption that by externalising our gender dissonance, we somehow 
invite any question on any aspect of our lives.

I wasn't sure why such people thought it my duty to answer intimate questions 
– particularly about my genitalia or my sexuality – that they'd never dream of 
asking anyone else. Seeing my irritation at being asked something 
inappropriate, their justification was often that they were "curious". The idea 
that their curiosity might affect someone other than themselves often came as a 
revelation.

Aware that not everyone understands transsexuality 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BTf1FPRLbZ0>, I tried to be accommodating. (I'd 
brought it on myself, right?) The circumstances were vital: questions from 
friends as we discussed how I'd handle myself in an often transphobic society 
were very welcome. As for people I'd just met, I soon decided that I'd rather 
they asked me about anything on which they weren't sure (in particular which 
pronouns to use) rather than make assumptions about, or impose preconceptions 
on to, my identity.

Having done my homework, few of the questions were unanticipated: I quickly 
developed stock answers for the most common ones, which usually worked. (Many 
of them resembled those I was asked at'Charing Cross' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/22/ 
transgender-charing-cross>, incidentally.) Occasionally, though, I was 
surprised – often more by the context than the content. At a party where 
everyone seemed happy to take me as I came, one man cornered me and said:

"Juliet, you're not like the other Juliets I've met." (Mills? Stevenson? 
Bravo?) My heart sank well before the inevitable: "Can I ask you a question?"

"Ask whatever you like," I replied, "and I'll reserve the right not to answer."

"Fair enough," he said, and momentarily there was a pleasant consensus. "Do 
you not think you're mad?"

The idea that I might undertake the gender reassignment process without myself 
or others questioning mymental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/05/transgender-journey-depression>
 left me speechless (something which people who know me say doesn't happen 
often). There's no way to answer this, I thought, realising that the question – 
and its specific phrasing – was at best highly insensitive or, at worst, an 
attempt to put me in what he felt to be my place. Throughout my slow, 
simplified explanation of the numerous psychiatric assessments that had so far 
punctuated my journey I suspected that he wasn't really listening, and I 
wordlessly resolved not to field any more of his enquiries.

To be honest, such questions became the exception rather than the rule. 
Perhaps I adopted a more defensive body language and conversational tone after 
my early experiences: the previously mentioned"Are you a bird or a bloke?" 
question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, which 
taught me the need to close down leading questions to thwart an unwelcome (and 
often planned) follow-up; and particularly a night out with old friends, when 
one person's first words to me were: "Are you a man or a woman?"

"I'm a transsexual woman", I told him, hoping that he'd accept my 
self-definition. "What does transsexual mean?" he asked. Trying to be 
understanding of the fact that English wasn't his first language, I attempted 
to explain but, at 1am, didn't feel I was making much headway. Frustrated at 
his refusal to cease interrogating me, I decided to leave. In the future, I 
would make it clear when I didn't want to continue such a dialogue.

Intrusions did not always stop at the verbal, however. I discussed with 
expectant friends how being pregnant or transitioning were similar in that in 
both cases, some people feel no inhibitions about trying to touch you. Leaving 
a Brighton bar at 2am on Pride night, a man stopped me: "Hey darling, you're 
gorgeous!" I thanked him and tried to walk on. "Are you a man? Can I touch your 
tits?" My friend shoved him away and apologised – although it wasn't my friend 
who needed to.

Most questions came down to the single word (which drives parents of small 
children mad):"Why?" I could tell people that I had never felt comfortable in a 
male body, nor with the expectations that came with it, but I couldn't 
satisfactorily put into words the roots of my gender dysphoria to someone who'd 
never experienced it. As it always seems implicit that I should only be on the 
receiving end of gender-related questions, perhaps the best thing to do is to 
turn these questions around where possible. So, for those who are curious as to 
why, consider this: what makes younot want to transition, and how can you be 
sure you've made the right decision?

• Juliet Jacques's column appears fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 