
Jim O’Neill’s report has rightly brought into focus the urgent need to finance 
and develop new antibiotics (Radical plan to halt scourge of drug resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/no-antibiotics-without-a-test-says-report-on-rising-antimicrobial-resistance>
, 19 May). But what about the tools that already exist?

We know that vaccinations dramatically reduce the number of infections taking 
hold in the first place. Jim O’Neill says that if every child was vaccinated 
against pneumonia, it would potentially avert 11.4 million days of antibiotic 
use per year in children under five. What his report doesn’t do is join the 
dots and recommend that the companies that already produce these life-saving 
vaccines lower the price to improve coverage rates.

In the case of the pneumonia vaccine, GlaxoSmithKline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glaxosmithkline> and Pfizer have reported 
more than $30bn in sales in just five years. And yet pneumonia remains the 
single largest cause of death for children under five globally. The price of 
the vaccine is one reason for this. Countries including Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, 
Tunisia and Thailand have all voiced their frustration at not being able to 
afford it.

In the fight against drug resistance, companies such as GlaxoSmithKline and 
Pfizer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> should not be let off the 
hook by focusing exclusively on the new and the innovative. They must face 
their responsibility to children who are alive today – children who urgently 
need access to existing vaccines at a price their countries can afford.
Vickie Hawkins
Executive director, Médecins Sans Frontières UK

• We welcome the emphasis on the grave threat posed to the global community on 
antibiotic resistant superbugs contained in thereview on antimicrobial 
resistance <http://amr-review.org/> chaired by Jim O’Neill. The sobering 
figures suggesting the loss of 10 million lives a year by 2050 must be taken as 
a final warning for action.

The pressing need to fund the search for new antibiotics while cutting the 
unnecessary use of such drugs cannot be denied, but media reports have 
overlooked the importance given by the review to ensuring that the first line 
of defence against infection is robust – namely universal access to clean 
water, safe sanitation and rigorous hygiene.

One third of the world’s population does not have access to a safe toilet and 
one in 10 does not have clean water, creating an environment in many 
communities in which infections can thrive and spread, with particularly high 
impact on children and older people, who are more vulnerable.

Nearly four in 10 healthcare centres in the developing world do not have 
access to clean water, making it almost impossible to prevent the spread of 
infection within those facilities. An even greater proportion do not have water 
piped into the building, and so staff have to fetch water from up to half a 
kilometre away.

If we are to prevent the nightmare scenario presented by the review of losing 
10 million lives a year then governments around the world need to ensure that 
investment and political prioritisation in providing clean water, safe toilets 
and hygiene services reflect their crucial importance in slowing the 
development of drug resistance, as emphasised by last year’sWHO global action 
plan on antimicrobial resistance 
<http://www.who.int/drugresistance/global_action_plan/en/>.
Margaret Batty
Director, global policy and campaigns, WaterAid

• Increasing resistance to antibiotics presents one of the most serious 
threats to public health faced by the developed and developing world. I 
encourage the government to dedicate resources to this issue and afford it the 
prominence it deserves.

In addressing this issue, the government should take into account the impact 
of the use of antibiotics on animal health and animal welfare, particularly in 
commercial farming, and recognise the importance of veterinary science and 
human medicine working together to tackle the threat that resistance presents.

This is a prime example of the need for a One Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> approach – the interdisciplinary 
cooperation between human medicine and veterinary science, as well as an 
understanding of environmental, social and economic factors, in seeking an 
holistic solution to the crisis.
Professor Stuart Reid
Principal of the Royal Veterinary College; expert on antimicrobial resistance

• The imminent threat of antibiotics becoming ineffective in fighting diseases 
could indeed be catastrophic. It is estimated that almost 85 billion animals 
will have to be raised to meet the meat demand in the near future.Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> are raised in intensive factory 
farm conditions with minimum welfare standards. Little wonder then that disease 
and misery is rampant among them. They are fed antibiotics which humans then 
ingest, leading to drug resistance. There is an urgent need to move away from a 
meat-based diet to a plant-based vegetarian and vegan diet. This will take the 
pressure off the animals and also improve the health of the nation. As a bonus, 
global warming due to methane released by animals will slow down, as will the 
mass pollution of farmlands and waterways by billions of tons of animal waste 
and blood. A diet change is something each of us can do to help avert disaster.
Nitin Mehta
Croydon

• “Most of us received childhood vaccinations – measles, whooping cough and 
tuberculosis” (Blast from the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/23/fever-pitch-why-old-fashioned-infections-are-making-comeback>
, G2, 23 May). Well, TB yes, but the others? Those of us growing up in the 
1950s just caught “the usual childhood infections” (measles, rubella, whooping 
cough, chicken pox, scarlet fever, mumps) and gained our immunity that way. The 
folk wisdom was to get them as young as possible and get them out of the way, 
so “parties” at the house of the first child in the friendship group to 
contract one of these infections ensured that it spread quickly to the rest.
Pam Lunn
Kenilworth, Warwickshire 
 