
Marcus Wareing

What would you eat for your last supper?

It would have to be a roast dinner. Probably roast pork. In fact, let's go for 
roast pork belly alongside some roasted onion and apple. A real family 
favourite.

Who would cook it?

Me! With a little help from the boys...

Where would you eat it?

At home with Jane and the kids.

What would you drink?

It would have to be a Pétrus - obviously!

Katie Melua

What would you eat for your last supper?

I had a meal in Vienna recently which was astounding: steamed haddock with 
lemon ravioli. Normally I like my fish with chips so I surprised myself by 
loving a dish with complex flavours, but the tastes had a real beginning, 
middle and end. It was amazing! For dessert I'd have roasted bananas, mmm.

Who would cook it?

The same person that cooked it the other day in Vienna. I'm trying to learn to 
cook so maybe I'd tackle the dessert myself, hopefully without burning anything.

Where would you eat it?

In my home town of Batumi in Georgia with Joni Mitchell and, if I was really 
dying, everyone I loved. I'd go scuba diving first so I'd have a huge appetite.

What would you drink?

Whisky and coke. Followed by shots of B52s.

Antony Worrall Thompson

What would you eat for your last supper?

I'd have caviar, a rib of British beef with all the trimmings and sticky 
toffee pudding - as it would be my last meal I wouldn't worry that sturgeon are 
nearly extinct nor the amount of calories consumed.

Who would cook it?

Gordon Ramsey.

Where would you eat it?

On the moon - that way, I could leave Gordon there so he'd no longer be able 
to inflict himself on the rest of the world.

What would you drink?

With the caviar, I'd have Stolichnaya vodka, with the beef, a nice Sassicaia 
and finally, a Chateau D'Yquem with pudding.

· Marcus Wareing is chef patron of Petrus; Katie Melua's new album 'Pictures' 
is out now; Antony Worrall Thompson's food and kitchen rande are available at
awtonline.co.uk <http://www.awtonline.co.uk>
 