
A career in interim management takes more than a track record of delivery at 
executive level. You need to overlay your own professional experience with a 
set of important attributes, which aren't necessarily unique to a role as an 
interim manager, but are essential if you want to build a successful career 
from the role.

Here are the top five essential attributes:

Continuous improvement and change management skills

Do you find yourself continually questioning how things could be better? Are 
you not happy with the status quo, even if the status quo is proving positive? 
Do you always want to go one step further, come up with new ideas and innovate 
to achieve better results? Then you possess one of the most important 
attributes of an interim manager.

Improvement and change are major aspects of interim assignments, so 
individuals who question ingrained behaviours, attitudes and ways of working – 
and who strive for continuous improvement – will have a much greater chance of 
success. This ambition for improvement, however, needs to be balanced with the 
ability to positively influence and motivate people to change.

Effective communication skills

The ability to deliver clear messages to a wide variety of audiences is an 
essential skill, particularly when it comes to challenging existing attitudes 
and systems. An interim manager needs to handle challenging leadership 
situations with a combination of sensitivity and gravitas so they can integrate 
themselves into organisations and quickly engage a workforce.

Strategic thinking

As a permanent executive, you'll be required to engage in strategic thinking, 
looking at the organisation as a whole and considering the best approach to 
achieve the greatest long-term benefits.

With interim management, however, the importance of strategic thinking is 
amplified by the need to apply these skills quickly to a range of situations. 
You have to apply calculated change against a backdrop of varying and unique 
challenges. Interim managers need to apply these skills across a variety of 
industries and business settings too: those who can think in this way are 
generally the most sought after.

Flexibility and adaptability

Rolling with the punches, not being fazed by uncertainty and ambiguity, 
reading between the lines and being as comfortable rolling up your sleeves as 
operating in the boardroom are all required to be a successful interim manager. 
This extends to coping with often unconventional recruitment processes, being 
prepared to travel or work away and potentially flexing your day rate and 
therefore your earnings, in line with market demands. Though the benefits can 
be significant – in terms of stimulating assignments, work satisfaction and 
reward – interim managers need to cope with a level of uncertainty and change, 
not only on assignments but often in their personal circumstances as well.

Outcomes focused

Interim managers are focused on delivering results with lasting benefits and 
are paid on the understanding that goals and objectives will be achieved. 
Because of your knowledge and experience, you will often be asked to input into 
other initiatives and the danger is that you may experience "mission creep" or 
end up attending every meeting that would be expected of a permanent employee. 
To be a successful interim manager you'll need to learn to block out the noise 
and focus on the outcomes that you've committed to achieving in order to 
guarantee the success of your assignment.

Simon Drake is the director of interim and executive search at Penna 
<http://www.penna.com/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 