
John Leslie, one of the two TV presenters fired last week, worked for my 
network. The crux of our decision to end his contract was that by not defending 
himself against widespread and disturbing allegations he compromised his 
ability to do the job and effectively disqualified himself. In the end we had 
to face the fact that the trust between him and the audience had been broken.

We live in the age of celebrity, and the interaction between the celeb, the 
media and the public is complicated. The relationship between a TV star and the 
viewers is a strange one. Those who sit on the sofa at home watching the screen 
form a relationship with the presenters and performers. We get a sense of what 
makes them tick, so we feel we know them. We even make judgments about the kind 
of people they are.

From the other side it is a totally different game. The TV person sits talking 
into a camera, not seeing beyond. The point is that the presenter or star has a 
one-to-one relationship with the camera while the viewer is able to have a 
relationship with the star.

Very often what that means is that there is a gap between the real person and 
the persona on screen. When John Leslie sat on the sofa of This Morning his 
viewers saw an affable, engaging thirtysomething joking with Fern Britton, a 
million miles away from the disturbing picture painted across endless pages of 
the papers these past weeks.

Similarly, my view of Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>, like many others, is 
of a media savvy, clever, urbane and talented performer - the best deliverer of 
put-downs in the business - with nothing extraordinary about his private life. 
Now we know differently and therefore, perceptibly, the viewer's relationship 
with him onscreen has changed.

John Leslie was our responsibility. This was not a moral decision but morals 
came into it because we, as a mass public-service channel, quite rightly, 
operate within the broad moral parameters of our time. In different ways, both 
Leslie and Deayton undermined their relationship with the audience. The 
programmes they fronted were editorially compromised as a contradiction emerged 
between the persona on screen and the person.

Ironically, of course, both Leslie and Deayton, would still be employed and 
the public none the wiser about their private lives if they had remained 
private. But they did not and thus action had to be taken.

In saying that they are entitled to a private life, which I believe, we make 
an unspoken assumption, as employees of onscreen talent, that these lives are 
within acceptable parameters.

Presenters and TV stars are well rewarded, but let's not make the mis take of 
thinking that in spite of all the apparent glamour, their lives are not without 
pressure and strain which the ordinary viewer would not recognise. How strange 
is it to be approached in the street by people who act like they have known you 
all their lives but are complete strangers? There is a public expectation about 
their behaviour which we mere mortals do not have to consider. A night on the 
town with your mates and a drink too many do not end up as a page lead in the 
tabloids.

Ironically, it is this level of scrutiny which can lead some to behaviour 
which ultimately compromises their relationship with their audience. For some 
entertainers the gap between the high of the performance and the relative 
mundanity of everyday life can itself lead to problems.

I worked with Michael Barrymore for many years. He was a special talent, 
possibly the best TV performer of his generation. But I think Michael was only 
truly fulfilled when he was on stage or on camera performing. The chasm between 
this and his everyday life meant the rest of the time he was wrestling with 
whatever demons had been let loose by his dysfunctional past.

It's worth pointing out that in none of these cases was the broadcaster guilty 
of bowing to trial by media. If we had been, the stars in question would have 
been sacked the minute the exposés hit the newsstands. But in the end all 
broadcasters have a duty to protect that bond of trust with viewers at all 
costs. What it comes down to is not what will the papers say but what will the 
viewers think.

Back them or sack them?

 Piers Morgan, Mirror editor and former guest on HIGNFY

On Deayton, of course it's not trial by media - the media did not go into the 
bedroom with the hooker and snort cocaine. Anyone who has appeared on Have I 
Got News For You realises that if Angus becomes the only story in town and 
every guest can have a go at him, his position as a presenter becomes 
untenable. When Christine Hamilton takes the moral high ground, you know the 
game's up. There is more of a legitimate argument about trial by media in John 
Leslie's case.

 Mark Borkowski, PR agent

There is a big question about what TV companies do - they do not invest in 
their talent and people come and go and they don't look after them. They need 
to look at what the Hollywood studios do and set up talent liaison units who 
have a pastoral and a protective role. Part of the problem these days is anyone 
can be a celebrity and celebrity is not measured by achievements but by column 
inches. Where are the heroes these days? Would a TV company produce someone 
like Michael Parkinson these days? I doubt it very much.

 Boyd Hilton, TV editor, heat

I thought for the first time that it was very uncomfortable viewing. Ian 
Hislop was going for him in a more pointedly moralistic way, and it looked 
genuinely uncomfortable, and took over the programme. If he stayed, every time 
there were more allegations, it would all come up again - he was the presenter 
of a programme for whom this story is gold dust, and if every guest can resort 
to it, it will never end. Angus didn't seem to know how to deal with it. If it 
wasn't for the fact that he's a presenter of a programme like this, I think 
he'd have probably stayed where he was. Leslie and Barrymore are different in 
that they were involved in tawdry and possibly illegal events, while at the 
same time being firm family favourites.

 Duncan Lamont, media lawyer, Charles Russell

You have to remember that the court of appeal, in the cases of Garry Flitcroft 
and Jamie Theakston, has ruled there is no privacy for the sort of thing that 
Angus Deayton got up to. Mistresses have the right to sell their stories, 
article 10 [of the European human rights convention, guaranteeing freedom of 
expression] is a strong as article 8 [privacy]. There will be some things that 
the courts will protect, but there is no law of privacy. We may wonder why the 
public doesn't tire of all of this, but it seems as if we never will, and there 
is no legal reason why it can't be published. As far as Leslie is concerned, if 
I was advising him I'd say sue the Sun and the Mail - he has nothing to lose. 
All the evidence they have only amounts to low-level sexual harassment, and 
that doesn't amount to a hill of beans compared with the more serious 
allegations that have been levelled against him.

· David Liddiment <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-liddiment> is ITV 
director of channels.
 