
Football and racing proved to be an unwholesome mix at Cheltenham on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/16/samir-carruthers-apology-urinate-pint-glass-cheltenham-festival-mk-dons>
, but three different sports came together in a much more suitable way at the 
end of Wednesday’s card, as Alan Shearer and Lee Westwood joined their fellow 
owners with runners in the parade ring before the Weatherbys Champion Bumper.

Shearer, a former England captain turned football pundit, and Westwood, a 
golfer who has won tournaments on five continents, were at Cheltenham to watch 
their five-year-old mare Augusta Kate run in the only race at the meeting 
without any obstacles.

Nicky Henderson on Sprinter Sacre: ‘It’s probably given me the most pleasure’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/nicky-henderson-sprinter-sacre-queen-mother-champion-chase-cheltenham>
The television presenters Ant and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>, who also have shares in 
a syndicate formed by the leading owner Graham Wylie, could not make it to the 
West Country due to work commitments, but there was still more than enough 
stardust sprinkled among her owners to persuade the great majority of racegoers 
to stay behind for the finale.

They were prepared to back Augusta Kate with serious money, too. Willie 
Mullins, her trainer, was responsible for seven of the 23 runners, including 
Bacardys, the mount of his main jockey Ruby Walsh, but the punters latched on 
to Augusta Kate and by the time the race started she was the 7-2 favourite 
ahead of Ballyandy, from the nearby Nigel Twiston-Davies stable, at 5-1.

Augusta Kate’s breeding may have played a part in the punt, as she is by 
Yeats, the only horse to win the Ascot Gold Cup four times, and her dam was the 
outstanding hurdler Feathard Lady, who was unbeaten in seven starts and ended 
her career with a victory in a Grade One race at Kempton.

Bank on Thistlecrack in the World Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/thistlecrack-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
Westwood, meanwhile, was looking for a double at the meeting, having watched 
Ballyalton, a horse he shares with his father, John, take the concluding 
novices’ handicap on Tuesday. The horse was a Christmas present for his father 
four years ago.

Shearer, meanwhile, told an interviewer before Wednesday’ss race that it was 
all about the experience. “We will have a great day whatever happens,” he said. 
“We never expected to have one of the fancied runners in a race at the
Cheltenham Festival <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>. If 
the best happens, I might not come home on Wednesday night.”

Once the race started, both the owners and punters had reason to feel 
optimistic as Paul Townend, Augusta Kate’s jockey, settled her behind the early 
leaders, apparently going well. He moved up towards the pace with two furlongs 
to run but was pushing hard soon afterwards and could not find any extra in the 
closing stages as Ballyandy and Battleford fought out a desperate finish, with 
two more Mullins‑trained horses close behind. Augusta Kate could finish only 
seventh behind Ballyandy, beaten about five lengths.

Augusta Kate could still run at Punchestown’s Festival in late April, however, 
while her form entitles her to be a useful novice hurdler next season. She also 
finished one place outside the prize money, though the £938 for finishing sixth 
would be unlikely to make much difference to her owners, whose interest, at 
this meeting above all, is in the excitement and the achievement of competing 
at Cheltenham.

Shearer and Westwood both have long experience of the ups and downs of 
racehorse ownership, and will still have reason to hope that Augusta Kate will 
be a high achiever over jumps.

Westwood co-owns the veteran sprinter Hoof It, the 2011 Stewards’ Cup winner, 
with his manager, Chubby Chandler, who also has a share in Augusta Kate. Hoof 
It has won nine times in all, earning nearly £300,000 in prize money, and was 
sixth in the Group One Nunthorpe Stakes in 2011 after starting favourite at 
11-4. Chandler and Westwood also had shares in Right Approach, who they bought 
from the Queen and went on to win the Dubai Turf, one of the most valuable 
events in world racing.

Shearer has had shares in a long list of horses, including Justonefortheroad, 
who won eight races for him including an £11,000 handicap at York at 25-1. But 
Westwood’s first horse, In The Arena, often struggled to beat a single 
opponent, never mind finish in the frame.

A crowd of 57,093 was in attendance at Cheltenham on Wednesday, a 3% increase 
on last year’s figure. The total was also a record for the second day since the 
Festival moved from three days to four in 2005.
 