
 'Be sure to tell me when the romantic bit starts,' said my wife. 'I wouldn't 
want to miss that.' In the tiny swaying room, she struggled into her tartan 
pyjamas, and climbed the stepladder to her bunk, banging her head on the 
ceiling. The light went off, leaving the cabin in darkness save for the 
rhythmic sweep of orange street lamps. Outside the window, a wet Friday night 
in Watford slipped by.

We were on a sleeper train to Fort William. It was our first wedding 
anniversary, and this long weekend was meant to provide the perfect backdrop: a 
romantic train journey; a glorious drive through the Highlands; and two nights 
on beautiful, mountainous, desolate Skye. Eight hours later, I sat on my bunk 
gazing out of the window through a grey dawn at a brooding loch and snow-capped 
peaks beyond. 'Wake up,' I whispered to my wife. 'The romantic bit has 
started.' At Fort William, we picked up a hire car and drove 80 miles to Kyle 
of Lochalsh, the mainland gateway to The Misty Isle. The opening of the Skye 
Road Bridge in 1995 has made Skye the most accessible of the Hebridean islands. 
Five minutes and £4.70 later we were heading across Skye's southern flatlands 
towards the sawtooth profile of the Cuillin, the island's famous mountain 
range. The weather here is mercurial. One minute, a mackerel sky casts a 
benign, ethereal glow, warming the ochre heather that carpets the lower slopes. 
The next a swath of angry mist blacks out the sun and cuts the tops off the 
mountains, leaving the jagged slopes of hard gabbro in cold silhouette.

The road threaded and twisted its way gingerly through the stunning landscape 
of volcanic rock and sea lochs, every turn revealing immense and majestic 
panoramas. With a population of 9,000 occupying 535 square miles, Skye can 
fairly be placed in the wilderness bracket. After 90 minutes, we had almost 
reached the northwest extremity of the island. The main road ended at Dunvegan, 
and we took a single track for a further five miles along the lonely banks of 
Loch Dunvegan. Then we spotted The Three Chimneys restaurant - an appropriate 
name for a journey that began with a train (maybe only fans of E. Nesbit will 
appreciate this). Since moving to the crofter's cottage at Colbost from Croydon 
15 years ago, Shirley and Eddie Spear have built a worldwide reputation for 
fine food and wine. The remote restaurant has won many gastronomic awards 
culminating in 1998 with the prestigious Macallan Scottish Restaurant of the 
Year Award.

That night in the low-beamed restaurant, with roaring fire and flickering 
candlelight, we were offered a selection of Shirley's delicious home-made 
breads: Parmesan, sesame and sunflower, or lemon and cardamom. For the main 
course her legendary Skye crab risotto, and the fillet of Highland beef in 
Madeira sauce on a sage potato cake were to die for. One food critic wrote that 
the restaurant should be on everybody's list of things to do before they 
expire. The man on the next table looked fit to explode as he went for his 
second pudding. In 1999, the Spears thoughtfully opened six huge and stunningly 
designed rooms adjoining the restaurant, so that visitors could stagger under 
the weight of a swollen stomach the 30 yards to bed. That night, drifting off 
to the sound of the brook running past our window, and feeling the salty breeze 
coming over the Minch, I fell into the kind of sleep I'd only experienced under 
general anaesthetic.

After breakfast that included smoked salmon, venison, cured ham and oatcakes, 
we headed around the Duirinish peninsula. At Ramasaig we started a four-hour 
walk on tracks, soft peat, past the foaming waterfalls of Gleann a' Phuill and 
An Dubh Loch, and through the deserted crofting village of Lorgill, whose 
people were shipped to Nova Scotia after the Highland Clearances of the 
mid-nineteenth century. We picked our way over volcanic rocks and climbed a 
steep, grassy slope speckled with primroses, then looked down at the kelp 
forests dancing in the pellucid water of Lorgill Bay. We carried on along 
seriously vertiginous cliffs with views across the glassy Sea of the Hebrides 
to North and South Uist. Looking inland, the skyline was dominated by the two 
giant mesas known as MacLeod's Tables, and further south the giant, snowy, 
imperious Cuillin. Apart from sea eagles, buzzards, the seals and the rabbits, 
we didn't see another living soul.

We drove south to spend our second and final night on Skye at the splendidly 
romantic Hotel Eilean Iarmain on the Sleat Peninsula. On our balcony, we sipped 
the hotel's ownTé Bheag whisky and watched the dramatic sunset.

Three days on this breathtakingly beautiful and spiritual island had a 
profound effect on us. We talked of moving, of what we could do, of how 
magnificent our lives might be, of being able to shout at the top of our voices 
and not be heard.

In the morning, we reluctantly drove back across the bridge and stopped at the 
old ferry landing in Kyle of Lochalsh. As we looked back, the Misty Isle almost 
disappeared completely in a wall of white, like a wonderful secret.

Skye lines

Walking: Skye is a paradise for walkers of all abilities and fitness levels. 
The Pathfinder Guide to Skye and the North West Highlands by John Brooks and 
Neil Wilson (Jarrold Publishing & Ordnance Survey, £8.95) offers 13 walks on 
the island, ranging from short and easy to long and challenging.

Dunvegan Castle: MacLeod Estate, Dunvegan . (01470 521206). The ancestral home 
of the Clan MacLeod for 700 years, the crenellated castle has classic baronial 
proportions. Open all year.

Armadale Castle Gardens & Museum of the Isles: Armadale, Sleat . (01471 
844305). Ancestral home of the MacDonalds on the Sleat Peninsula, for centuries 
the bitter enemies of the MacLeods.

Talisker Distillery Visitor Centre: Carbost . (01478 614308). The source of 
Skye's famous whisky. There is a superb view of the Cuillin from the road above 
the distillery. Open all year round for tours.

Flora MacDonald's grave and monument, Kilmuir: Skye's legendary first lady is 
buried at Kilmuir. Flora MacDonald helped Bonnie Prince Charlie to flee to Skye 
in 1746, disguised as her Irish servant. She spent a year in the Tower of 
London for her part in the escape.

For a brochure about Skye and the Highlands, call the Highlands of Scotland 
Tourist Board on 0870 514 3070, or visit their website atwww.host.co.uk 
<http://www.host.co.uk>. Bed and breakfast at the five-star Three Chimneys 
costs £140 for two people sharing a suite. Dinner costs £30 per person for 
three courses, excluding wine. For bookings and information, call 01470 511258, 
or visit the Three Chimneys website atwww.threechimneys.co.uk 
<http://www.threechimneys.co.uk>. Bed and breakfast at the Hotel Eilean Iarmain 
costs from £110 a night for two people. Call 01471 833332 for details.ScotRail 
sleepers travel from London's Euston Station to Fort William six nights a week, 
with a Standardsleeper return costing £129. Call 0845 748 4950 for details.
 