
The credit crunch's all-reaching scythe is gradually clipping away at its 
latest victim … our holidays. According to asurvey 
<http://www.savebuckets.co.uk/media/2008-04-30-one-in-five-cancel-summer-holidays.php>
 by price comparison site savebuckets.com, with monthly budgets tightening and 
economic heebie jeebies rattling consumer confidence, one in five Brits have 
cancelled their summer holidays this year.

Also contributing to the holiday cull is the strength of the euro when 
compared to the pound; making some of our most popular holiday destinations - 
France, Spain, Greece - more expensive than ever. But perhaps rather than 
calling the whole thing off, now is the time to experiment. Here are five 
short-haul alternatives outside of the eurozone, where the good 'ol sterling 
still converts nicely.

Poland's Baltic Coast

Britain's loss is Poland's gain - as scores of Poles begin to return to their 
homeland, now is the best time to follow them, before Poland takes the euro 
leap that its 2003 accession to the EU obliges. Paying in zloty means that 
hotels on Poland's Baltic coast can still be half the price of those across the 
border in Germany.

Where to go: Those in the know will often cite Tarifa in Spain - blasted by 
the Levante wind funnelled through the straights of Gibraltar - as the best 
windsurfing spot in Europe. Similarly-minded residents of northern Poland may 
disagree. The conditions created around the 35km long sandy peninsula atHel 
<http://www.staypoland.com/about_hel.htm> are perfect for wind-borne 
speedsters, and for the price of a solitary tapas dish on the Spanish coast you 
can bag a healthy serving of freshly-caught cod served in a variety of eateries 
in Wladyslawowo, the tiny village at the peninsula's tip. For those looking for 
nocturnal distraction, Hel is an hour and a half from Gdansk, Gdynia and 
summertime party citySopot <http://www.gdansk-life.com/poland/sopot-nightlife>. 

The Gulf of Aqaba in Egypt

With one of the lowest entries on the Big Mac Index 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Mac_Index> (the Economist's comparison of the 
price of one the world's most ubiquitous products is a brilliant layman's guide 
to currency strength), Egypt is still a relative snip. Large swathes of the Red 
Sea coast has been hastily developed for package tourism over the last few 
years, but further into the Gulf of Aqaba the atmosphere changes dramatically.

Where to go: Dahab <http://www.dahab.net/> has been a backpacker oasis for 
years, attracting a laidback crowd to the old Bedouin section of the town, 
Asalah, where dozens of hostels and restaurants line the beach. But now the 
city has something a little more upmarket, and rather stylish too - theAlf 
Leila B&B <http://alfleila.com/> is the first boutique hotel in South Sinai, 
with doubles starting from £20. Buses to Dahab run six times a day from Sharm 
el-Sheikh.

Turkey's Mediterranean Coast

Turkey lopped six zeroes from its careering Lira in 2004, and the subsequent 
economic strengthening means Istanbul can now be as budget-bludgeoning as any 
of western Europe's capitals. But large stretches of the south coast are a 
bargain bagger's bliss, offering the obscenely blue waters and the startling 
scenery of the Amalfi coast, but for a much lower premium.

Where to go: The city of Olympos is protected by a national law forbidding the 
excessive use of concrete in any of Turkey's national parks, meaning that most 
of the development here is a strictly wooden affair. Two outlandish treehouse 
villages cater for visitors over the summer months -Kadirs 
<http://www.kadirstreehouses.org/> and Bayrams <http://www.bayrams.com/> - each 
with their own wooden bars, relaxation areas and restaurants. The beach 
stretches for miles, with archaeological ruins scattered in among the trees at 
the sand's edge. Fresh-caught grilled fish, Turkish salad and wine can cost 
less that £5 at one of the handful of restaurants near the beach in the 
neighbouring village of Cirali.

The Albanian Riviera

From the port town of Saranda, at the foot of the Albanian Riviera, you can 
see the coast of Corfu blazing across the water. But not only is the Albanian 
Riviera cheaper than its Greek neighbour, it offers double the adventure. From 
Saranda the coast undulates and buckles as it stretches north, with dozens of 
coves and hidden beaches marking the way to Vlora and the soaring Llogora Pass. 
Few accommodation options cost more than £20 here, and a bottle of homemade 
rakia, the character-building local alcoholic staple, costs a couple of quid.

Where to go: The path from the coastal road down to the beach at Dhermi passes 
through olive trees and orange groves, heading for a collection of beach huts 
by the water (email:lorencgjikurija@yahoo.com <mailto:lorencgjikurija@yahoo.com>
 for reservations). During the week there is barely anyone there, but even if 
there is, the sand stretches almost a kilometre to the north until it bends 
towards a rocky headland.

Rural Iceland

Yup, you heard me. Iceland is the current top dawg on The Big Mac index 
(meaning you get the littlest value for money), but the Economist boffins 
published their calculations last July, and since then the Icelandic economy 
has been having a bit of a wobble. In January a pound was worth 121 kronas … at 
the moment, you'll get just under 151. In short, there's never been a better 
time to visit, and you'll be doing their economy a favour whilst you're at it.

Where to go: Reykjavik is the easy answer, with an amazing concentration of 
bars, music venues, galleries and boutiques in the downtown 101 district, but 
over the summer months when the weather is mild (and sometimes even hot!), make 
the most of the rest of the country. A single road runs the circumference of 
the island, connecting all of Iceland's habitable parts. Plan an extended stay 
at Husavik in the north, where theKaldbaks-Kot <http://cottages.is/> cottages 
are scattered across farmland with superb views of ice-topped mountains and 
tranquil lakes.
 