
At the end of the Chelsea Flower Show week, I caught a flight to Japan. The 
purpose of my trip was to plant a 'wild' garden at the base of a mountain in 
Hokkaido. I was going away for no more than a week, but it was a wrench to 
leave my garden. As though risen from the ashes of a late spring, it was 
brimful and as fresh as it ever would be. The Iris 'Gypsy Beauty' were newly 
burst - I knew I would miss the best of them - the Nectaroscordum would be 
fertilised by the bees by the time I returned, their dusky bells lifting 
upwards to prove it. I had sown what I could in the salad beds, earthed up the 
potatoes and staked what I thought might lean by the time I returned, but 
nothing made up for the fact that I would miss the fleeting change from spring 
to summer.

What epitomised this moment, and what had me standing at the base of the house 
drinking in the last minutes before leaving, was my white wisteria. It has been 
flowering for about seven of the 11 years it has been in, and until a couple of 
years ago we were able to count the number of racemes that increased year on 
year. This year it would have been impossible, for it has now reached the upper 
bedroom windows, and from top to meticulously trained bottom it was festooned 
with flower. They came out during a hot weekend in early May, in a flurry. 
Cooler weather then slowed their progress, and by the time I was leaving they 
were at their zenith, a great cascade that had me standing open-mouthed and 
marvelling. On my return, this pristine moment had passed for another year, the 
fresh purity replaced with something else, late spring dimmed to summer.

A client in southern Italy introduced me to the purity of white. She had been 
gardening in the heat for many years and knew the benefits of planting to make 
you feel cool. She told me that there would only be white and green in the 
garden, and it was a good rule to live by since it kept things feeling like 
they were in the first flush, always fresh and zesty. We played with white 
agapanthus and plumbago in the sun and Philadelphus coronarius and Rosa 'White 
Wings', setting them against the froth of white Sweet Rocket and Aquilegia 
'Kristall'. We went for whites that were clear of pink to retain the clarity. 
If they were to contain another colour, the Wisteria floribunda 'Alba' provided 
the lead, with the palest hint of yellow on the keel of each flower. We used 
the green-white Cobaea scandens f alba and even Nicotiana 'Lime Green' to push 
the mood, but we were purists to the core and the garden appeared to keep its 
cool despite the heat.

The garden took on a wonderful mood at either end of the day, and particularly 
at dusk when the flowers glowed. Nicotiana affinis seized this moment, its 
nocturnal flowers opening in the evening to attract moths. We used them as 
wayfinders on moonlit nights.

I came to the idea of white flowers rather slowly, as I had always found the 
perfection of the White Garden at Sissinghurst rather too much. It was too 
pristine and there was too much of it, like a luxury bedroom furnished for 
absolute comfort with white shag pile. I much preferred the cow parsley in the 
hedgerow, but in truth I like that more because its white is just a smattering, 
a touch of sparkle, and this is how I like to use white in the garden. The Rosa 
'Cooper's Burmese' on the back fence is the complement to the white wisteria 
and it keeps the planting around it feeling fresh and lively as long as it is 
out. It is a wonderful chalky bloom, single and with little perfume, but with a 
presence that is pure and unadulterated. Although it blooms only once, I can 
forgive its brevity as I do a blossom tree, because it marks the month so 
strikingly. At its feet I have the white form of Thalictrum aquilegiifolium, 
Allium 'Mount Everest' and the lemon-peel yellow poppy, Stylophorum lasiocarpum.

Nearby there are white arum lilies set against the dark, constant green of the 
bamboo. The arums make the white of Persicaria polymorpha a very definite cream 
and highlight the problem I had with Sissinghurst of putting too many whites 
together in one space. White flowers always have something else in them, be it 
blue, pink, mauve or even brown, and these off whites soon look grubby when 
they are shown up by the purity of something like Zantedeschia aethiopica. A 
cream rose such as Rosa 'Nevada' needs to be with the right partners, and, 
since it fades to pink, it is a shame for this ageing process to feel muddied 
by wrongly placed partners. Something light and airy like Anthriscus 
'Ravenswing' is ideal.

Out in the sun, Gaura lindheimeri is one of my absolute favourites for a hot, 
free-draining position, and its smattering of flower can be used among plants 
that might appear to be blocky or brash. Jasmine is good in the sun, too, as is 
Hosta plantaginea, which I plant in pots to keep the slugs at bay. This is a 
plant that encapsulates the best of what I like in my whites: purity and 
elegance. Lilium regale has it, and so do the wood anemones and Dicentra 
'Langtrees' that are yet to make a show in the shade. This year I have also 
replaced the medley of fiesta-coloured dahlias at the end of the garden with a 
group of the cactus-flowered 'White Star'. Final, incontrovertible proof of my 
full conversion.

dan.pearson@observer.co.uk <mailto:dan.pearson@observer.co.uk>

· Observer offer: Wisteria floribunda 'Alba' is a vigorous climber bearing 
white flowers in racemes to 60cm. Readers can buy one plant in a 9cm pot for 
£13.95 or two for just £22.90, inc UK mainland p&p. Call 0870 836 0909, quoting 
ref OBDP082, or send a cheque, payable to Observer Reader Offers, with your 
order to: Observer Wisteria Floribunda 'Alba' Offer, OBDP082, Rookery Farm, 
Joys Bank, Holbeach St Johns, Spalding, PE12 8SG. Dispatch will be within 28 
days

· For regular updates on our allotment's progress, pictures and slideshows, 
and to share your gardening comments, questions, recipes and advice, visit
blogs.theguardian.com/allotment <http://blogs.theguardian.com/allotment/>
 