
A new drug regime that shortens the treatment for multi-drug resistant 
tuberculosis from two years to nine months has been recommended for use by the
World Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation>, raising hopes 
that hundreds of thousands of people will stay the course and be cured.

About 480,000 people are estimated by the WHO to have this form of the 
infectious disease, which has been found in every country in the world and 
kills 190,000 every year. MDR-TB cannot be cured by the standard six-month 
regimen of antibiotics because the bacteria have become resistant to some or 
all of the drugs, meaning they no longer work.

The existing course of combined heavy-duty antibiotics used against MDR-TB 
lasts up to two years and there are toxic side-effects to some of the drugs, 
causing deafness and other problems. About half of those put on the treatment 
give up, raising the risk that their disease will return and spread to other 
people.

The WHO announced two innovations that it hopes will dramatically change this 
scenario. It recommended a rapid diagnostic test, which can detect how 
resistant the patient’s form of TB is, and a shorter course of treatment which 
lasts between nine and 12 months. For MDR-TB, patients can take a less toxic 
combination than for XDR-TB – the extremely resistant form.

14,600 pills over two years – there has to be a better way to treat TB | 
Philippe Douste-Blazy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/24/pills-treat-tb-research-multi-drug-resistant-tuberculosis>
“This is a critical step forward in tackling the MDR-TB public health crisis,” 
said Dr Mario Raviglione, the director of the WHO’s global TB programme. “The 
new WHO recommendations offer hope to hundreds of thousands of MDR-TB patients 
who can now benefit from a test that quickly identifies eligibility for the 
shorter regimen, and then complete treatment in half the time and at nearly 
half the cost.”

The regimen has not gone through formal clinical trials, but was developed by 
a number of organisations working on TB and tried successfully in 515 patients 
in Bangladesh between 2005 and 2011, and then on 408 people in a number of 
African nations. It is now being tested in an official clinical trial in 
Mongolia.

The WHO, however, said it felt there was already enough information to 
recommend the use of the shorter treatment regimen. “We have decided to 
accelerate the procedure because we believe that these tools have real 
potential to save lives immediately,” Raviglione told the Guardian. The 
24-month regimen had not been tested in a clinical trial either, he said. 
However, the body would be looking for confirmation of the new advice from the 
Mongolian study.

“The basis of all this is how terrible the current treatment is – in 24 months 
14,000 pills have to be taken by one person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/24/pills-treat-tb-research-multi-drug-resistant-tuberculosis>
. Less than 50% who take the current treatment are cured. In 2016, that is what 
we are still dealing with,” said Dr ID Rusen, a senior vice-president in the 
International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, which has been 
developing the shorter regimen.

Cure rates are much higher with the shorter course of treatment – more than 
80%, compared with 50%. In Bangladesh, he said, “it was almost too good to be 
true. How could we get 85-86% treatment success when we were struggling with 
the current regimen?”

 Philipp du Cros, the head of the Manson Unit at Médecins Sans Frontières, 
which provides medical support and research for the charity’s field operations, 
said the recommendations were a promising step forward and countries should act 
on them immediately.


“MSF has seen positive outcomes using a nine-month regimen for some people 
with DR-TB (drug-resistant TB) in countries such as Swaziland and Uzbekistan,” 
he said. “However, these shorter regimens still use some of the old, toxic 
drugs, particularly the daily painful injections people must endure. Today’s 
announcement must not lead us to lose sight of the desperate need for 
completely new treatment regimens.”

 