
Poor Tesco. Profits down 16%; £5bn wiped off the value of the company. A 
packet of cheese and some onions gone mysteriously AWOL from its Henley branch. 
Oh, how the heart bleeds for chief executive,Phil Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jun/08/philip-clarke-tesco-new-chief-profile>
, who, after a shareholder rebellion in June last year, was forced to limit his 
pay packet to a maximum of just £6.9m this year.

For who can't feel a twinge of sympathy in their hearts for the lovable 
corporate behemoth? Apart from thenation's pig farmers who protested outside 
Tesco's AGM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/01/tesco-annual-meeting-bonuses> 
last year that the supermarket had squeezed them so much, they were now 
subsidising them to the tune of £10 a pig, perhaps? Or the whales and dolphins 
that Tesco's subsidiary company in Japan sells as a tasty snack? Or the 
nation's wind-blasted high streets empty bar the occasional piece of tumbleweed?

In fairness, Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is simply 
applying the logic of early 21st-century capitalism. This, as eagle-eyed 
viewers ofThe Apprentice know, works roughly like this: take any old crap and 
then charge as much as you can possibly get away with for it. Or ideally more. 
In this, the episode in which one of the teams was charged with making 
sandwiches and used tuna so cheap that it had the texture and appearance of cat 
food, causing unsuspecting diners across the City of London to gag and make 
vomiting noises, is quite instructive. They won. Alan Sugar congratulated them 
for their initiative and enterprise.

That's capitalism. Just as cutting open women and inserting exploding bags of 
industrial-grade silicone into their breasts, and charging them handsome sums 
of money for it, is too. As is sacking all your check-out staff and outsourcing 
the labour to your customers. Industrial-grade silicone is cheaper than medical 
grade, after all. And may not cause cancer. And having no staff at all and 
letting your customers flail helplessly with unauthorised items in the bagging 
area is significantly cheaper than having lots. So what if breasts explode and 
shoppers despair? It's simply called increasing your margins.

So who can blame Antony Worrall Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/09/antony-worrall-thompson-sorry-shoplifting?newsfeed=true>
 who was caught after self-scanning? That was all he was trying to do. The 
small technicality of the law aside, is there really so much difference? On one 
occasion, he said last week, he paid Tesco £180 for three cases of champagne 
and then stole £4 worth of goods. His margin, admittedly, was pathetic. It's 
the kind of derisory profit line that would make shareholders laugh and point. 
But it was just a margin, not the Great Train Robbery. Or the Royal Bank of 
Scotland's balance sheet.

Worrall Thompson broke the law. But in other circumstances, if he was, say, a 
limited company and Tesco was, for example, a single mother, from whom he'd 
successfully managed to make an extra 31p profit, then there'd be no case to 
answer. Making money out of poor people is what we call "business".

Besides, we expect companies and corporations to rip us off. To overcharge us. 
To pass off substandard goods if they can get away with it. To pay their chief 
executives more money than existed in all of ancient Rome and have BBC 
programmes endorsing the sale of cat food sandwiches as simply sound commercial 
sense.

We've all experienced that startled moment of horror when we've done something 
rash, such as catching a train at rush hour. Or using our phones abroad. Or 
buying a cup of tea at a motorway service station. (Unit price, what? Maybe 2p? 
Sale price? £2.75. I'm a rubbish capitalist and can't do the sums but isn't 
that something like about 20,000% profit?)

Morality is a tricky business in the marketplace, especially now. When 
companies can't pay their debts, they go bankrupt. Or ask the government for a 
bailout. American financial writer James Surowiecki points out that American 
Airlines went into administration not because it couldn't afford to pay its 
debts but that it'd be "foolish" of it to waste more money doing so. By 
contrast, millions of Americans whose homes are in negative equity would also 
be better off making "a strategic default". Yet they don't – it's considered 
bad form. Immoral. It's a double standard that he calls "obvious and offensive".

It's probably not a good idea to break the law and helping yourself to items 
from Tesco's deli counter isn't to be recommended. But when the chief operating 
officer sells his shares eight days before last week's profits warning, netting 
himself £200,000, isn't that a bit obvious and offensive too? The company has 
defendedBob Robbins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/13/tesco-boss-sells-shares-profits-warning>
's actions. Of course. But there are some who say pocketing £200,000 is a 
greater offence than taking a tub of reduced-for-quick-sale coleslaw. That Phil 
Clarke's multimillion pound bonus somewhat overshadows the price of a packet of 
cheese.

Congratulations, Tesco. Replacing check-outs with self-scanning tills and CCTV 
is a means of treating both your employees and your customers with contempt. 
What a brilliant coup! Remove all human contact, destroy jobs and imply 
potential criminality in all. Apart from your senior executives, who are simply 
acting "within the rules".

What do Antony Worrall Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonyworrallthompson> and your 16% 
nosedive have in common? They're simply the logic of the market, coming back to 
bite you on the arse.
 