
 Is there any greater pleasure in the game than watching Virat Kohli bat? Only 
one, perhaps, and that's watching AB de Villiers bat. I have often dwelt on the 
emerging state of the New Batsmanship, its first intimations coming with the 
cult ofSehwagology 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/2009/12/se7en-in-praise-of-viru.html> and 
its immortal, irreducible credo "see ball, hit ball", and on through its 
power-fuelled expansion:Chris Gayle's vision 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/chris-gayle-grace-bradman.html> 
and its currency of six-hitting; the re-evaluation of wicket as 'resource', a 
new disposability,the age of Brendon McCullum's "I'm coming anyway" 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/2013/02/im-coming-anyway-batting-and-fear.html>
 and so on; the switch-hit, the Dilscoop, the ramp...David Warner 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/2011/11/david-warner-and-virender-sehwags.html>
, Sammy, Maxwell, and into a brutal future where a double hundred in a T20 
innings feels vaguely possible, or at least plausible.

 And yet something strange and unexpected – at least to me – has happened. 
Kohli and de Villiers have assumed mastery of all three forms of the game with 
a technique I'd describe as Heightened Classical. The odd backhanded swipe or 
head-high smear aside, their batting has a framework that adapts to all 
scenarios: the shorter the game, the more of it they use. Both will be all-time 
greats.

 Watching them prompted another question. Who was the last great batsman that 
England produced?I wrote a blog 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/2014/04/who-was-last-great-batsman-that-england.html>
 that - to summarise - argued that as Pietersen was produced outside of the 
English system you might have to go back as far as Graham Gooch and Geoffrey 
Boycott to find unequivocal greatness.

There were some tremendous tweets and comments in response and one name came 
up repeatedly: that of David Ivon Gower.

To digress briefly, the point of a blog (to me at least) is that it's written 
quickly, a sort of instant repository for a passing thought. Admittedly, the 
lack of research is a good get-out for whatever glaring omissions come along 
but when I wrote the post in question I'd thought of Gower, and had an 
undeniable flicker as I went to type his name alongside those of Geoffrey 
Boycott and Graham Gooch – and then didn't.

 I've had to question why. Statistically, Gower's Test match average of 44.25 
sits perfectly between those of Gooch and Boycott, as does his total of 8,231 
runs. Many England fans, perhaps a majority, would pick Gower ahead of both in 
a heartbeat, and it's easy to understand that. His languid, trippy batting was 
hardly difficult to love.

Gower's Test career was the first that I saw from start to end. I can clearly 
recall watching his first delivery, a pirouette pull for four from Liaqat Ali, 
a seamer who bowled left-arm over. It remains the one thing anyone remembers 
Liaqat for: from the beginning Gower was sprinkling stardust from his hem.

 His batting lives in the memory as something shimmering and ephemeral. He 
used a wafer of a bat, the Gray-Nicolls GN500, a four-scoop version of the 
legendary GN100, and he hardly seemed to swing it, yet the ball whispered to 
the boundary. Watching him live, his pick-up and follow-through both felt late: 
the gods had given him time, and he understood how to use it. He was a dream.
 This drives at the heart of the arguments about him. I've always been 
fascinated by the role that aesthetics play in sport. Who can objectively know 
whether Gower found the game easier than Boycott? It's like trying to discover 
whether we all see colours the same. What's possible to perceive is that Gower 
made it appear easier. By physiological fluke, through the notions of art and 
beauty, he looked better.

 Once this was established a whole series of prejudices begin to apply. 
Gower's public persona as the gifted dilettante was set. LikeKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, he didn't seem overly 
bothered by getting out. Like generations of gentry, he appeared to regard 
cricket as a diverting way to pass the time, rather than an all-consuming 
obsession. Last in the nets and first out, that was David.

 His county career pales when compared to Boycott's or Gooch's. He was 
apparently dropped from his school rugby team for "lack of effort". In his 
long-standing role as a TV presenter, he conveys the impression that the gig is 
another extension of an enviable lifestyle. As with his batting, charm is 
persuasive.

 And yet... You don't score all of those runs without wanting to. No one goes 
119 Test innings without a duck by not being switched on from ball one.

 Gower faced some fearsome attacks. His average and hundred count against 
Australia compares well with Boycott and Gooch, but against West Indies he made 
just one century and averaged 32, compared to Gooch's 44.83 and five hundreds, 
and Boycott's 45.93 and five tons. They both opened, too. It's here, against 
the best of all, that perhaps Gower falls short.

 What is greatness anyway? It's easy to grasp when a player is considerably 
superior in terms of stats and longevity and success, less so when they play 
for a weaker side or burn bright and short. Ultimately, Gower's batting spread 
joy and grew a love for the game in those who watched, and that is an enduring 
legacy.

 It's the best answer I've got, too...

• This blog first appeared on The Old Batsman 
<http://theoldbatsman.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow The Old Batsman on Twitter <https://twitter.com/theoldbatsman>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 