
JOHN NEWCOMBE, THREE-TIME WIMBLEDON CHAMPION AND FORMER WORLD NO1


"Djokovic is coming out of winning the Davis Cup so he's really coming into 
this event as the fittest player, mentally and physically, and he's playing at 
his absolute peak. Before the semis if you had said it was going to be a 
Djokovic-Murray final I would have said that it was an even match but unless 
Murray brings his A game he doesn't have a chance. Based on the semi-finals, I 
would say straight sets to Djokovic. If Murray brings his A game it will 
probably be Djokovic in four sets."

KEN ROSEWALL, WINNER OF EIGHT GRAND SLAM TITLES 


"I'd probably be leaning towards Djokovic. He's had some experience playing in 
grand slam finals and though Andy has as well, he hasn't been as successful as 
yet. I think it could be a pretty tight match. Djokovic is a tough competitor 
but Andy has improved a lot and he's playing with a fair amount of confidence. 
It should be a pretty close match but Andy's a great competitor and he'll be in 
there to the end."

CAROLINE WOZNIACKI, WOMEN'S WORLD NO1 


"It's going to be an exciting one, definitely two great players in the final 
so it's going to be a tough one. They both have equal chances and they know 
each other very well so it's going to be very interesting. Andy's definitely 
good enough to win a grand slam, he's playing great tennis, so he has a good 
chance. I expect it to be a long match but I think it is 50-50."

DARREN CAHILL, FORMER COACH OF ANDRE AGASSI & COMMENTATOR 


"Murray knows Djokovic extremely well. These two guys grew up through the 
juniors together and Djokovic won the first four times they played but Murray 
has beaten him the last three times, all on hard court, and he's won six sets 
in a row. You can't really pick a winner on this one. Djokovic is playing much 
better than he was 12 months ago and Murray has kept that high standard. This 
is going to be a pick 'em match but for me, the story is Djokovic."

HENRI LECONTE, 1988 FRENCH OPEN RUNNER-UP


"Djokovic. He is playing so well, he defends so well and he has all the shots. 
On the other hand, I hope Andy forgets about last year. It's Djokovic not 
Federer, but I would say it's 60-40 for Djokovic. Andy has the skill, he has 
the game, but he has to come more to the net. He has to take risks, he has to 
go for it. If he stays back, it will be difficult. If it's too hot, that's a 
problem for Djokovic and better for Murray. I think Djokovic in four sets."

SVEN GROENEVELD, FORMER COACH OF ANA IVANOVIC


"The first set is going to be the one that really sets the pace. It will be a 
little bit similar to what you saw in the semi-final, long rallies and 
exchanges that are going to be extremely physical. I heard the weather is 
changing - I think that will favour Andy, so fingers crossed. I think Andy is 
ready for it."

ROD LAVER, WINNER OF 11 GRAND SLAM TITLES INCLUDING THREE AUSTRALIAN OPEN 
TITLES


"Djokovic has an edge because he has won it before but Murray might just get 
him. Murray has enough experience to handle the nerves but it will be very 
close. If it gets into a hitting match Djokovic will win, but if Murray can mix 
it up often he has the ability to pull it off. Djokovic is tenacious and he 
doesn't give up. He has a good serve, and his groundstrokes are probably better 
than Murray's. But Murray is more versatile. If he keeps Djokovic guessing, 
he can win."
 