
This has been an exciting, and perhaps disquieting, week for those employed in 
the multifarious business of having opinions about whether Andy Murray will 
finally, perhaps, win a grand slam. Recently it has become fashionable to 
describe Murray as a man perpetually on the verge, an almost champion swilling 
with frothy, buttery near-greatness. Tomorrow he plays Roger Federer in the 
final of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>
, having hauled in his previous opponent, Marin Cilic, with such unwavering 
certainty that the Croat spent much of the last two sets looking tired and sad 
and noble, like a dying bear. Murray seems so efficient now that you wonder why 
so much of watching him play seems to be about the resolution of tension. It's 
a strange tension, too, mostly concerned, not with second serves or backhand 
winners, but with issues of personality and self-expression and – crucially – 
what he's really like deep down inside.

There is an accepted narrative to this: we start from an assumption of lurking 
emotional frigidity. "He just needs something to light the fuse, to get him 
going," the men on TV kept saying in the first set against Cilic. For a while 
Murray will creak and shiver on the baseline, a ferment of curdled restraint. 
"He's expressing himself verbally,"John Lloyd 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2010/jan/29/andy-murray-australian-open-john-lloyd>
 declared as the match tipped Murray's way, making him sound like a captive 
gorilla asking for a new football. Then comes the decisive moment of catharsis 
that sees Murray roaring and shrieking like a gangly, bouffant, white-shorted 
1950s B-movie werewolf. Angular Scots reserve conquered, he can "come forward" 
as we keep urging him, and get on with winning the match.

Just thinking about it now, it all feels terribly unrelaxed and even quite 
intrusive. If this is, at times, an almost physical sensation, perhaps that's 
not surprising.Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> is the only 
sport that is really all about sex. There is nothing new or controversial in 
this. As a popular sport tennis has its roots in hair-oiled country house 
flirtation, its rhythms perfectly suited to the honeyed repartee of romantic 
pursuit. You can tell it's all about sex because the English spend most of 
Wimbledon tittering and giggling. Plus it's the only professional sport where 
men's and women's competitions are unquestioningly bonded at the hip. A solely 
male grand slam would be deathly and, like an unrelentingly men-only Friday 
night in the pub, oddly pointless.

For Murray, this conjoinedness has expressed itself most recently in his 
winching into place alongside Laura Robson as a furnished and burnished and 
excessively giggly boy-girl public relations figurehead for the labouring 
juggernaut of British tennis. It has become standard at this point to say that 
Robson is "good for" Murray, a scenario that paints Murray as a seductively 
stifled all-court Mr Darcy, raw with unrelieved tension. There is something 
vaguely Jane Austen-ish about the pair of them together, jousting their way 
through another press conference, the courtly Mr Murray suddenly boyish beside 
free-spirited Ms Robson. And let's just say it right now. If you don't, on some 
level, want to see Murray and Robson one day get married and live in a big 
house in the country where they keep horses, then you're barely human.

Although, if this were ever going to work as an Austen-style narrative Murray 
would have to unsmilingly evade Robson's initial earnest advances, causing her 
to veer off tearfully and become infatuated with some mustachioed brute, 
perhaps the Bosnian world No 33, who would then string her along in 
dishonourable fashion while a narrow-eyed Murray hoovered up grand slams – but 
never, crucially, Wimbledon – before seeing the folly of his haughty ways, 
rescuing her from the brute, winning in SW19 after learning to love 
again/express his truest feelings and maybe appearing on celebrity Mr and Mrs 
with Vernon Kay.

In this set-up, right now Murray is in his smouldering stage: all set to dive 
into the duckpond and emerge steaming and alarmingly priapic. There is 
something hymeneal about the final threshold he might yet cross tomorrow 
morning. The tension, as he approaches consummation, is palpable, fraught and 
entirely tennis in its nature. It will be a wonderful relief all round if he 
can do it. And if he does let's hope we've all still got something to talk 
about afterwards.
 