
It's that time of year again – rich list season. Whether they provoke envy, 
indignation or aspiration, these unscientific attempts to put a pricetag on the 
chattels of the world's wealthiest heirs and tycoons can always be relied upon 
to cause a stir.

Monday saw publication of Forbes billionaires list, which puts Microsoft 
founderBill Gates <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> at the top 
of the tree, surrounded by the usual suspects – Carlos Slim, Amancio Ortega and 
Warren Buffett. The same quartet dominated a list published last week by 
China's Hurun Report.

But when the analysis turns to the UK, the consensus breaks down.

Forbes has the Duke of Westminster as Britain's richest man, while Hurun puts 
him in fifth place. Last year's Sunday Times list ranked him eighth, and when 
its updated table is published next month he is not expected to have climbed 
far from that spot. X-Wealth has his Lordship at number four in its UK rankings.

The confusion stems for a basic problem: what constitutes a "British" 
billionaire? The UK has bamboozling rules on residency for the super-rich – in 
particular its so-called "non-domicile" rules, which allow wealthy individuals 
to insist they are not permanently resident for tax purposes, are difficult to 
grasp. Moreover, many non-doms prefer not to advertise they qualify for such 
sweetheart deals with HMRC.

To some, Alisher Usmanov, Lakshmi Mittal, John Fredriksen, Hans Rausing and 
Roman Abramovich <https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich> are all 
UK billionaires. To others, their attachment to Britain is a mere flag of 
convenience.

Surprisingly to those not familiar to the finer details of HMRC rules, even 
Daily Mail proprietor Viscount Rothermere, a hereditary peer, qualifies as a UK 
non-dom.

Adding to the confusion, the influx of overseas non-dom billionaires is 
mirrored by the exodus of many of our home-grown super-rich.

Lady Tina Green, wife of retail tycoon Sir Phillip, is the beneficial owner of 
much of the TopShop and BHS empire, but she lives in Monaco. Ought that to 
disqualify the couple from UK rich lists?

Meanwhile, their friends Sir Frederick and Sir David Barclay, owners of the 
Telegraph, Ritz and Littlewoods, regularly helicopter between Monaco and their 
private isle of Brecqhou in the Channel Islands.

Also residing offshore, on his own isle of Necker in the British Virgin 
Islands, is SirRichard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson>. Similarly, Spurs 
football club owner and currency trader Joe Lewis, born above a pub in London's 
East End, divides his time between his superyacht and homes in the US and 
Caribbean.

Little wonder no one can agree who are the richest billionaires in Britain. It 
is only a shame none of these glossy publications spell out the reason why. 
It's only a three-letter word.
 