
A Twitter user called Conservative MP Louise Mensch "a typical soulless 
rich whore"; TV critic AA Gill said Professor Mary Beard is "too ugly for TV"; 
a tweet allegedly described the 19-year-old victim of convicted rapist and 
footballerChed Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/may/01/ched-evans-rape-twitter-investigation>
 as "a money-grabbing little tramp". These are just a few examples of 
misogynistic abuse levelled at women in traditional and non-traditional media 
recently. Journalist and TV presenter Miriam O'Reilly, who won a landmark 
ageism case against the BBC, discusses media misogyny withNina Power 
<http://roehampton.ac.uk/staff/NinaPower>, a senior lecturer in philosophy at 
Roehampton University and the author of One Dimensional Woman, a discussion of 
the contemporary portrayal of women. Laura Barnett listens in.

Miriam O'Reilly: The assault on Louise Mensch on Twitter this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-womens-blog-with-jane-martinson/2012/may/02/louise-mensch-misogyny-twitter-abuse>
 was shocking and insidious. I know what it's like to be attacked by an 
internet troll. I've only been on Twitter for two months, but already a man – 
and I know who he is – has been getting in touch with my followers and sending 
them lies and distortions about me. It was nothing like as bad as the abuse 
Louise was subjected to, but it's still very disturbing. You feel you should 
rise above it – but if someone is trying to undermine your standing and your 
character, then I do think you have to fight back.

Nina Power: That's horrific, Miriam. It used to be harder to say that sort of 
thing – or it was certainly creepier: you had to get letter-writing paper and 
sit down with your typewriter. It's much easier to compose something awful 
behind an anonymous handle.

MO'R: People seem to think the internet gives them the freedom to say things 
they would not normally say – certainly not to your face. Online, they can just 
spit their venom in any direction they like and hide behind a screen name.

NP: That's true. In the early days of the internet people were quite utopian 
about it; it was all about dissolving identities, getting rid of gender 
binaries. But the internet is obviously a central feature of contemporary life, 
and contemporary life is, in general, sexist, racist and so on. So why wouldn't 
the internet also be those things?

MO'R: But why aren't the same horrible terms used about men? Of course men are 
abused online, but not with the sort of four-letter words used about Louise. Is 
it because people are threatened by strong women who speak out?

NP: Yes, partly. Mary Beard was right, and very funny, in the way she handled 
[AA Gill's] stupid comment 
<http://louderthanwar.com/aa-gill-v-mary-beard-tv-critics-bizarre-sexist-rant-another-sign-of-dumb-culture/>
 about not being pretty enough for TV [Beard responded 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2134146/Too-ugly-TV-No-Im-brainy-men-fear-clever-women.html>
 with an article saying men fear clever women]. But we still live in a sexist 
world. With the recession, too, I wouldn't be surprised if we see more attacks 
on women as a prelude to pushing them back into the home, or making them suffer 
the cuts more harshly.

Laura Barnett: So you think there's a tangible link between media misogyny and 
the effects of the recession?

NP: Definitely. This happens when there's a perceived austerity: you start 
attacking various groups. It comes from the top and filters down into the media.

MO'R: What shocks me is the apparent media consensus that it's OK for Samantha 
Brick to write aboutMary Beard <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mary-beard> 
in the terms she used in the Daily Mail [Brick wrote that women on TV should 
conform to a certain ideal of beauty]. But there were about 1,600 online 
responses to that article from people outraged she was attacking Mary. I was 
really heartened by that – and that's not something I've often said about a 
Daily Mail comments stream.

NP: There are also people on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> who always attack misogyny and 
racism wherever they see it. Depending on who you follow, you can still get 
quite a utopian vision of the world there.

MO'R: Yes. I'm not altogether depressed about the attacks that women get on 
social media. I think we are being pulled back from that by a clear voice from 
women saying: "No, we're not going to put up with it any more."

LB: Presumably, Miriam, you feel the criticism levelled at Mary chimes with 
what you've been saying for a long time about the emphasis placed by television 
on women's youth and looks?

MO'R: It's a great example of what women in TV face: we have this ideal of 
what's acceptable, which is to be young and pretty, with beautifully done hair 
and nails.I was really pleased 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/apr/25/aa-gill-jibes-mary-beard>
 that Mary fought back; it's tough, because you leave yourself open to even 
more abuse. But you just have to realise we have an opportunity to change 
things. I feel we're starting to turn a corner – but maybe I'm an eternal 
optimist.

NP: But it's still overwhelmingly white, middle-class men in the media who are 
calling the shots. Only 7% of people go to private school, and yet the media is 
still filled with them. It takes confidence to push a vision – to say: "No, we 
don't want to see only that kind of woman on TV." That's class confidence, 
instilled by private schools.

MO'R: I don't agree. I left school at 17; my confidence came through my work. 
TV execs are just entrenched in this view that they're giving the viewers what 
they think they want. It's as simple as blokes fancying young, pretty women. 
Even when they do use older women, they go for caricatures: they can't accept 
that people will want to watch an older woman who knows her subject, and it 
doesn't matter whether she has grey hair or she's leaping around being 
ridiculous on Strictly Come Dancing.

NP: Maybe this is TV's last gasp. A lot of the interesting stuff that's 
happening online doesn't have to rely on these gender stereotypes. It's truly 
audience-driven, and much more balanced.

LB: That's a much more positive depiction of the treatment of women online 
than the one we started with.

NP: Yes. The internet is a place for all these interesting things – 
investigative journalism, blogs – but it's also a place where you're attacked. 
But women have to keep going with what they're doing, and not be put off by the 
abuse.

MO'R: You're exactly right. It would be shocking if a woman were bullied into 
silence. Mensch was right to go public and expose these people – and with the 
naming of the rape victim in the Ched Evans case, it was absolutely right that 
the police moved in quickly. I definitely think that outing the bullies, naming 
and shaming them, is the way to go.

NP: My answers are more structural, I'm afraid: we're not going to solve any 
of these things in a society that is misogynistic and racist to its heart. It's 
so obvious and boring to attackLouise Mensch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/louise-mensch> for being a woman: why not 
attack her policies? Still, the internet contains these other images of worlds 
that are not sexist and misogynistic. The internet may ultimately change itself.

• This article will be opened to comments on Saturday morning
 