
In his role as UN special envoy for global education, Gordon Brown has 
declared this coming Saturday 10 November 10th a'global day of action' 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-20045482> in support of Malala Yousafzai, a 
month to the day that the 15-year-old Pakistani schoolgirl was attacked by the 
Taliban, simply for insisting that she go to school.

As she recovers in a Birmingham hospital, Brown has urged people to support 
the estimated 32 million girls worldwide who are denied the right to go to 
school every day, by markingMalala Day. The tribute will coincide with his trip 
to Pakistanto deliver a petition <http://educationenvoy.org/> containing more 
than a million signatures, to President Asif Ali Zardari, urging him to make 
education a reality for all Pakistani children, irrespective of gender.

The plans for Malala Day reminded me of the girls that I grew up with, who 
were also denied their right to learn; the irony is that it happened right 
here, in the backstreets of inner-city Bradford. Some of these girls I know 
well since they are my first cousins, British-born Pakistanis just like me. My 
cousin Aisha comes to mind immediately, since she was around the age that 
Malala is today when she was permanently removed from school during the early 
1980s. She had just reached puberty, you see, which posed a threat to her 
father, just as Malala's adolescence was a menace to the Taliban.
 Gordon Brown; taking Malala's battle back to Pakistan. Photograph: Luke 
MacGregor/Reuters 
Aisha's father and mine both hail from a village in the Chach region of 
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, which borders Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa province where the Swat Valley is located; the valley which is home 
to Malala and her family. People from the Chach make up the second largest 
community of Pakistanis in Britain with sizeable populations in Birmingham and 
Bradford; people with origins in the Mirpur region in Pakistani Kashmir make up 
around 70%.

Although the Chach region is free from Taliban rule, it still follows the 
stringently patriarchal Pakhtunwali code of conduct which is essentially 
obsessed with controlling women's behaviour. You see, the Chach people hold 
their honour very dear; and honour for the Chach or Chachis is inextricably 
linked to a woman's virginity, so the slightest irregularity in a woman's 
behaviour threatens the reputation of the clan – men as well as women. And when 
a community's value system is based on honour, a blemish could have long 
lasting repercussions. Since female virginity is deemed to be such a liability, 
it follows that women's behaviour and movements must be strictly controlled.

This is why educating girls is deemed to be destructive for this community. 
Not only would schooling broaden a girl's mind, it might also provoke her to 
rebel against the system, thereby also dishonouring the clan. I have heard 
uncles say:

Why would I want to teach my daughter how to write? So she can write love 
letters?


Aisha's father was unable to appreciate the value of schooling his daughter so 
he chose to terminate her compulsory education. He was also deeply 
uncomfortable about his 14 year old daughter coming into contact with the 
opposite sex in the classroom.

The common method for fooling the education authorities during the 1980s was 
to buy a plane ticket – one way of course - purely for the purpose of 
presenting it as evidence that the schoolgirl was being sent to Pakistan for 
good. The ticket was then returned to the travel agent for a nominal fee.

Meanwhile, Aisha stayed in inner city Bradford, swapping school for an 
intensive course of domesticity, to prepare her for imminent marriage. Since 
the family lived in a rear house, in a back-to-back Victorian terrace, Aisha 
could easily venture out into the yard without being seen from the street. And 
if she needed to go any further, then she was draped in a black bhurka from 
head to foot, with matching face veil – which she still wears today.

After a year or so, Aisha's father feared the authorities were on to him so he 
swiftly sent her to Pakistan. I met my cousin a few years later, when she 
returned with her Pakistani husband, a child in her arms and another on the 
way. With her husband's level of education even poorer than hers, and with 
Aisha relying on him to run her errands, it made tricky work of the simplest 
tasks. The first time she sent him out to buy a tin of tomatoes, he returned 
with baked beans. Not only did family life make it impossible for Aisha to take 
up her studies where they'd been interrupted, she perpetuated the cycle by 
marrying off her own daughter at a young age too – although Aisha did allow her 
the concession of completing her compulsory years in school.

Today, Aisha is barely 40 years old and she is already a grandmother. I am 
acutely aware that my life might have been very different had my father played 
a greater role in my upbringing. Moreover, I could never understand how someone 
as independent and educated as my mother could marry into my father's 
conservative family in the first place. The mystery was finally unravelled in 
the course of my current research aboutMuslim women's experiences of love and 
marriage <http://www.brad.ac.uk/theatre/whats-on/BHM/Cartographies-of-love/>. I 
decided to include my mum among the three generations of Pakistani women I 
interviewed in Bradford and Kirklees.

Mum explained that her parents had originally planned for her to marry one of 
her cousins from their ancestral village in the Punjab. The system secured 
family ties and offered some guarantees about the suitor's character and 
standing, since he was already known to the bride's parents. But the plan 
changed after mum was deemed to be too overqualified to marry from among the 
pool of cousins that had been lined up. Like Malala's father, Ziauddin 
Yousafzai, my grandfather was also committed to educating his daughters. So 
much so that villagers mocked him for selling land to pay for school fees. They 
taunted:

You're flogging the most valuable commodity you have, and you're squandering 
it on your daughters! What's the point of educating them? And besides, where 
will you find men to marry your girls?


My grandfather eventually left the village for Rawalpindi so he could offer 
his daughters the same educational opportunities as his son.
 Malala Yousafzai. Fighting back. Photograph: Reuters 
Meanwhile, my father was a family associate settled in Britain. He wrote to my 
grandfather asking for his daughter's hand. With the concept of courtship 
completely non-existent, mum's acceptance was based on a handful of letters 
that were exchanged between her father and the suitor. Although my grandfather 
had reservations about the suitor's notoriously conservative family background, 
he reasoned that someone who'd been living in England for almost ten years must 
be well educated and westernised. You see, the suitor had left Pakistan whilst 
he was mid school, in his early teens during the 1950s.

Mum told me:

I could see that my father preferred the idea of me leading a married life in 
England where I could fit in better, rather than in our village. Because that 
was pretty much the alternative.


Little did she know that as soon as her husband arrived in England, he headed 
straight for the textile mills of Bradford where a willingness to graft was all 
that was needed. Work was plentiful, well-paid, and didn't require much 
English, nor any skills or qualifications.

In fact, it was mum's qualifications which proved to be our saving grace when 
she found herself left in Bradford with three children to raise by herself, 
several years later. My mum echoed Malala's words as she reflected:

By giving me an education, my father gave me the means to stand on my own feet.


She also told me that when the villagers had mocked her father for selling the 
family land, he had replied:

A daughter's education is more durable than a dowry. 


As I mark Malala Day on November 10th, I'll be thanking men like my 
grandfather as well as men like Ziauddin Yousafzai for their wisdom in 
understanding the value of educating their daughters. I'll also be thinking 
about my cousin Aisha as well as the 32 million girls around the world who are 
denied the basic freedom to learn every day.

Irna Qureshi <https://twitter.com/irnaqureshi> is an anthropologist and writer 
on British Asian culture.She blogs about being British, Muslim and female in 
Bradford. <http://www.bollywoodinbritain.wordpress.com/> Her latest work, 
Cartographies of Love 
<http://www.brad.ac.uk/theatre/whats-on/BHM/Cartographies-of-love/>, is a live 
performance based on intimate conversations about love with three generations 
of Muslim women in and around Bradford and Kirklees.
 