
I started teaching adults 9 years ago and, from the start, I loved how my 
students challenged assumptions and used education to transform their lives. I 
waited in vain to hear a New Labour minister speak about learning in such terms.

Only last year, when Vince Cable made his first speech 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/news/speeches/vince-cable-cass-business-school> as 
business secretary, did I finally hear someone in government speak about adult 
education with passion and insight: "Education for education's sake – learning 
how to learn – benefits the economy in the long term. A story from own life 
makes the point. My mother and father left school at 15 to work in factories. 
My father eventually taught building trades in the local technical college: we 
need more people like him. My mother was a housewife and when I was 10 she had 
a major nervous breakdown and spent time in a mental hospital. When she 
recovered she saved her mind through adult education – learning for the first 
time about history, literature, philosophy and art. We need more people like 
her, too."

Unfortunately, figures released to coinside with Adult Learners' Week 
<http://www.alw.org.uk/> (14-21 May) suggest there are fewer adults involved in 
education than a year ago, and that involvement is declining especially sharply 
among those who are more vulnerable.

An annual survey undertaken by the National Institute for Adult and Continuing 
Education <http://www.niace.org.uk/> shows that participation among the least 
skilled and those outside the labour market is 23%, the lowest reported total 
for over 20 years and a fall of 7% from 2010. Participation has also dropped 
especially sharply among men; a quarter of learning opportunities for adults 
aged 65-74 have been lost; and a much steeper decline is reported among ethnic 
minorities than white Britons.

The economic downtown has had a huge impact on the capacity of individuals and 
employers to fund adult learning. But the coalition has also fumbled the detail 
of key policies, despite some good intentions and efforts to safeguard budgets 
for community learning. In further education, for example, the desire to focus 
fee remission on those actively seeking work has disadvantaged students of 
English as a second language (ESOL), especially women. Estimates suggest that 
up to 70% of current students could be affected. Such a policy makes no sense 
from an economic point of view, if it is harder for individuals to re-enter 
employment at a later stage.

Similarly, in the new fees structure for universities, many of the Browne 
report <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-11519147>'s attempts to create 
equity between part- and full-time study have been squandered, asClaire 
Callender has demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/mar/29/student-loans-part-time-undergraduates>
. The decline of adult education departments, meanwhile, continues apace – and 
recent cutbacks atGlasgow University <http://savedace.wordpress.com/> show that 
this is no longer just an English phenomenon.

The benefits of adult education are economic and social – and the results for 
individuals can be transformative, as the example of Cable's parents shows. But 
there is an urgent need for the government to ensure that those on the margins 
of society have access to such opportunities.

Cable should use Adult Learners' Week to tweak proposals for universities so 
that funding is available for all from 2012. At the moment those studying for a 
course that is less than 25% or between 75% and 99% of full-time, most of whom 
are adult learners, will be excluded. An urgent rethink is also needed on ESOL 
provision and on the wider principle of learning for those out of, but not yet 
seeking, work – such as single parents. All of this could be underpinned by a 
new commitment to an "entitlement" to learning (and fee remission) for older 
people, those not in employment, the least skilled and those with health 
difficulties.

I spent my first year in adult education teaching on a course that was being 
shut down. (In retrospect, this was an appropriate induction into the 
profession.) During the exam board at the end of the year the course leader 
said: "In a few years' time, someone at this institution will turn round and 
say: 'We haven't got many mature students. Maybe we need a course for them?'" 
At the time I heard only bitterness in these remarks. But I recognise the hope 
in them now; her belief that such work would be needed again.

Cable understands the value of adult education for those, like his parents, 
who need it most. He remains the person best placed to ensure that such 
provision no longer has to survive only on hope.
 