
"It is remarkable how many positions of wealth, influence, celebrity and power 
in our society are held by individuals who were privately educated," Michael 
Gove noted last year. In 2013, John Major also cried shock that power in 
contemporary Britain appears to be held by the affluent middle class or the 
privately educated.

But it's not just political figures that are noticing the impact of privilege; 
research suggests that creative graduates who are trying to get jobs believe 
the creative workplace is only for a privileged few.

It's challenging for any university course or industry sector to say which 
variables graduates need to gain employment because gaining employment is so 
complex. Extensive research has found that many socioeconomic variables come 
into play for the graduate seeking work; their age, sex, nationality, class, 
family background, geographical area, qualifications, where they were educated 
and what they studied are all significant factors. It's difficult to unravel 
the separate threads in particular cases to isolate which variables are the 
most pertinent.

However, targeted research in particular contexts can reveal contemporary 
trends. As a researcher, I wanted to find out directly from undergraduates and 
graduates what really matters in the creative world, using a variety of outlets 
to gain the necessary feedback. The findings suggested that creative 
undergraduates and graduates overwhelmingly believe that confidence, contacts 
and money are the most important things they need to get work.

Having contacts is the most salient, because gaining employment in industries 
like theatre, dance, architecture, fine art, film, radio and publishing needs 
industry contacts, who act as gatekeepers. Creative working is seen to be made 
up of privileged clubs which, unless you know someone, are closed to new 
members.

Confidence and money were also seen to increase graduate chances of breaking 
into the creative industries. You have to believe you have the potential and 
money is needed to subsidise long periods of low paid (or unpaid) work 
experience, to manage self-employment, contract-working or fixed-term working 
with different employers where payment is unpredictable. Most work is 
London-centric, which also adds to living costs.

These factors are the foundations of affluent middle class and private 
education, so it's not surprising those from these backgrounds are more likely 
to break in.

Government-led employability strategies don't tend to focus on areas of 
confidence, contacts and money. Instead, they focus on graduates developing the 
skills to meet with what employers say is wanted in their industries. The idea 
is that by acquiring the necessary skills, the graduate then gets rewarded with 
a job.

But this research suggests that skills are only the baseline for potential 
employment in creative industries. These undergraduates and graduates perceived 
success in creative work as achievable through social, cultural and economic 
capital. Creative work is not about skills, it is mostly about privilege.

The graduates in this research thought that government-led employability 
strategies had little relevance to them. They said creative work is different; 
they won't have one job so one size never fits all, and their work is about 
creative interaction and finding solutions within a global environment.

"Complexability", not employability, is needed. This is having the necessary 
social, cultural and economic capital, along with a sophisticated creative 
agency, which helps graduates learn to work in different ways, with different 
people, places and cultures, often collaborating across disciplines and 
boundaries. The graduates said they want to be supported to develop this 
complexability because without it the privileged circles of paid work remained 
impenetrable.

But why should Britain support them and make creative work more inclusive?

Creativity makes social, cultural and economic sense. British film producer, 
David Puttnam, believes that creativity is the only tool we have left to solve 
many of our seemingly insolvable problems. Puttnam thinks Britain is strangled 
by 19th century examination policies and 20th century teaching and learning 
strategies while trying to engage with 21st century students who want 
contemporary and innovative ways of working.

The UK needs to modernise its policies and strategies to bring new members 
into the creative economy. Diversity in the creative economy is needed for it 
to flourish. As Major and Gove have observed, privilege often replicates 
privilege. We need to find new ways to open up the membership of many 
privileged circles.

Rachel Higdon is an education consultant and a university lecturer in academic 
development.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers>.
 