
Forget what your mum always told you. Sometimes it pays to be horrid. That, at 
least, was the message I received when I switched on my computer on Sunday 19 
February. This magazine had just published my review of Novikov, a huge, 
Russian-owned gastro-complex in London's Mayfair, and even before lunchtime the 
link had been tweeted many more times than the previous week's review of an 
American barbecue joint called Pitt Cue. That was tweeted out 44 times. The 
Novikov review would go on to be tweeted 500 times. The review was viewed by 
three times as many people and shared on Facebook by twice as many. In Moscow 
it was discussed on television, radio and in the press.

The difference? I liked Pitt Cue. I loved their ribs and the vibe and the 
pricing. Novikov? Not so much. I hated it. I hated almost everything about it, 
from the fetid concept to the gilded, tucked, colonically irrigated clientele 
to the sweaty faux Italian food which tasted like "cheap Chinese". My review 
concluded that the cooking is "so cack-handed, so foul, so astoundingly grim 
you want to congratulate the kitchen on its incompetence." It was disdain and 
fury in 780 forensically chosen words.

The standard narrative now demands that I confess a baffled kind of wonderment 
that such a hostile take-down should prove so popular. But like Novikov itself, 
that, too, would be total cobblers. I had known it would be one of my most-read 
reviews. For if there is one thing my dozen years as the restaurant critic for 
this newspaper has taught me it is that while people may like my restaurant 
reviews, what they really love are the brutally negative ones. They stop me in 
the street, send me emails, hand-write me letters telling me so.

It is why I have been asked to compile an eBook that is solely a collection of 
my reviews of bad restaurants.My Dining Hell is not even intended as a guide to 
where not to go; the vast majority of the places included have closed. It's 
simply because there is an appetite for take-downs. Believe me, nobody would 
want to read a bunch of my positive appraisals. But give them write-ups which 
compare the food to faecal matter, the decor to an S&M chamber and the service 
to something the staff of a Russian gulag would reject for being too severe, 
and then readers are interested. The question is: why? What is it about 
negative reviews that gets people going? What effect does it have on those 
reviewed? And how do those responsible for sticking the knife in feel about 
what they do?

The psychologist and author Oliver James tells me that, to understand their 
appeal, we must look to what's called "social-comparison theory". He says we 
have "a natural tendency to compare ourselves with other people in order to 
learn how to perform better and improve our self-esteem". We can compare both 
upwards and downwards, but "comparing upwards is dangerous because it can make 
you feel inadequate". If, however, you compare down, that can have positive 
outcomes. "We want to hear about bad things happening to other people," James 
says, "because it makes us feel better about ourselves." I like this theory, 
because it suggests I am performing a greater service for the readers than just 
telling them where not to eat. I am literally brightening their day.

But someone has to suffer to make that happen. On 30 November 2003 that person 
was Jamie Barber, one of the restaurateurs behind a new restaurant in London 
called Shumi, which was sold as a fusion of Japanese and Italian. Or, as I 
called it in the review, "one of the most irritating restaurants in London 
dining history". Barber, who, since Shumi's closure, has gone on to run a 
number of successful businesses, still remembers that review. "How could I 
forget?" he says. "As a restaurateur you put your heart and soul, not to 
mention your money, into the venture and then you are just at the mercy of the 
critics."

So did he think the review was unfair? "Look, we did get some good reviews, 
too. Yours, though, was by far the worst." I am almost minded to thank him. 
"But it did actually make me laugh." Well that's reassuring. "I would have 
preferred a good review. Then again a negative review can uncover something 
about the business that you might not see from being so close up." He says my 
review did that – uncovered certain things that looked pretentious. He admits, 
though, that after the experience he has stopped courting the restaurant 
critics. "It's like the movies. There are some movies the critics love but 
which do no business. And then there are the blockbusters the critics hate, and 
they do big box office." In short, we may not be as important as we like to 
think we are.

Still, reviews do WOUND, as well I know. In April 2008 the Telegraph published 
a review by the novelist Nicholas Blincoe of my bookThe Man Who Ate The World – 
a food travelogue. It began with the line: "IfThe Man Who Ate The World was a 
dinner it would be the dog's," and went downhill from there. He used the review 
as a bit of Freudian analysis, described me as being in a state of "abject 
panic" about my lifestyle choices, pulled apart my relationship with my mother 
and suggested the 100,000-word tome was merely one long cry for help. It was 
masterful and, of course, wrong. Wrong, wrong, wrong. The book is a work of 
genius.

How did I feel? I didn't like it, but I've long thought that being able to 
make a living by writing is a privilege and therefore if you have the arrogance 
to shove your thoughts out there you have to be prepared for what people might 
say. It doesn't mean you have to agree. (Not everybody is so sanguine. The 
19th-century German composer Max Reger allegedly once replied to a bad review 
with a note that read: "I am seated in the smallest room in the house. Your 
review is before me. Shortly it will be behind me.")

When I approach Blincoe for an interview he is wary. He wonders if I will 
stitch him up. I'm intrigued as to why he's so concerned. Well, he says, it 
remains the most savage review he has ever written. Did he worry about how I 
might respond? "I didn't think it would cause you emotional distress," he says. 
"Like anybody who enjoys writing for a living there's that weakness of wanting 
to get up on your hind legs and have your say." But, he says, "Critics are 
absolutely necessary. They've got to give a truthful assessment. You have 
always got to be accurate. And after that it's about building in the theatrics 
and drama." Does he, in retrospect, think his review of my book is fair? "Yes, 
I do. I identified its weaknesses." (He's wrong.)

Earlier this year the reviews website The Omnivore awarded the first Hatchet 
Job of The Year trophy, for the most skilful piece of negative literary 
criticism. It went to Adam Mars-Jones, for hisGuardian review of Michael 
Cunningham's novel,By Nightfall. Journalist and former literary editor Sam 
Leith, who published Blincoe's review of my book (bastard), was one of the 
judges. "It's very easy to get carried away when being negative," Leith says, 
"and we didn't want simply to reward vituperation. To write a bad review which 
is entertaining and fair, which tells you what the book is trying to deliver 
and why it fails to do so, is very hard. What makes a bad review really swing 
is when it's fair-minded."

That, Leith says, was what was so compelling about Mars-Jones's review. I ask 
the winning critic if he gets pleasure from writing a bad review and Mars-Jones 
denies it. "No, not at all. Anybody who writes a novel to the point of 
publication deserves a basic respect."

My so-called rival at the Sunday Times, AA Gill, has been reviewing 
restaurants for nearly 20 years. He once compared the hot pot at a Sichuan 
restaurant to "the bucket under a field-hospital operating table" and said the 
cooking at Pearl was "technically called 'fussy old bitch queen pursed-lip 
plate fiddles'". Unlike many others – including me – he denies that writing 
negative reviews is easier than writing positive reviews. "Writing is never 
easy," he says. "I know there are only so many meals left to me in life so I 
never set out purposefully to have a bad meal." Does he ever worry about the 
impact on the restaurants of a negative review? "No. I do not take credit for 
any extra bookings that follow a good review nor do I take responsibility. I am 
only writing for the readers."

Giles Coren, who does the job for the Times, and who has just published his 
own book about restaurants,How To Eat Out, probably dreams of having Gill's 
emotional carapace. "When I write I just want to be funny and to be liked. I 
want people to listen to me and think that Giles is a nice guy." Well you're 
not really in the right job then, are you? "I know. I sometimes feel like a hit 
man who's been hired to kill a bad man's daughter and who knows it's a terrible 
thing to do but who has to do it anyway." So does he agonise? "All the time – 
especially between the review being filed and publication." Recently he 
reviewed Tom Aikens's newly revamped restaurant, said it was like "a terrible 
motorway pile-up" and that the waiters were dressed in outfits he could only 
call "Bavarian rapist". He knows that Aikens, a chef he admires, was upset by 
it. "As writers we are meant to empathise with the human condition. And yet we 
write something that we know will make a fellow human being very unhappy. It's 
heart breaking." It should be said that Coren has talked publicly about being 
in Jungian therapy for years. He should probably carry on with that.

As to me, I cannot deny that writing a negative review is easier because bad 
experiences are simply funnier, the vocabulary of the awful much wider. Even so 
I rarely if ever seek them out. I don't have to, given how often they happen to 
me. But I am also a consumer of bad reviews. If they are fun to write they are 
also fun to read – like this one by a young rising politician called Winston 
Churchill. Asked about his dinner the night before, he replied: "It would have 
been splendid… if the wine had been as cold as the soup, the beef as rare as 
the service, the brandy as old as the fish, and the maid as willing as the 
duchess."

God, but I wish I'd written that.

My Dining Hell: Twenty Ways to Have a Lousy Night Out is published on 1 June 
in eBook format only, by Penguin Shorts, £1.99. Available from Amazon and all 
eBook retailers
 