
My Toyota Yaris was hit in a supermarket car park, smashed beyond economical 
repair, in August 2012. My boyfriend was driving – I was unwell – and as he was 
not a named driver, he was only covered for third party claims. There were no 
such claims as it was entirely the other driver's fault.

But because he was driving, neither my insurer nor the legal expenses cover on 
my policy would get involved. The other driver was insured by Swiftcover, part 
ofAxa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa>. I had to tackle them on my 
own.

My road tax and insurance ran out at the end of August so I had to pay to 
store the car, awaiting an Axa inspection. Despite frequent reminders, I heard 
nothing from Axa. In the meantime, I could not afford another car and after 
paying for four months' storage, I sold the car as scrap for £500.

Now, more than six months after the incident, I have still heard nothing from 
Axa.KL, Teddington, Middx

Motor insurers are notoriously difficult when dealing with legitimate claims 
from other parties. In this case, it was doubly difficult as both your insurer 
and legal expenses provider washed their hands of you because your boyfriend 
was covered under his own policy only for third-party risks when driving 
another car.

There was initially some confusion over who would obtain the CCTV footage from 
the car park. But this does not explain the six months of delay.

Axa owned up swiftly when we called. It blamed an "inexcusable lack of 
communication" and added: "We didn't reply. We didn't give the service we 
should have. It was unacceptable." The only reason it could come up with was 
that it was hit in August by a "surge of events", mostly relating to last 
summer's bad weather.

Axa has now agreed to pay you the full value of the car – it calculated this 
slightly higher than your estimate – less the scrap value, plus storage costs 
and a £10 a day public transport allowance: £3,917. It will also add £200 to 
compensate you for its poor service.

This week's column is guest-written by Tony Levene.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Bachelor & Brignall, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 