
So Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> 
loses his job, tabloid bloodlust has been sated for another week and our TV 
screens are scrubbed clean. What nonsense. TV increasingly relies on depravity 
of every kind to sell itself to audiences eager for titillation.

Channel 4 gives us endless sex docs dressed up as reportage. Channel 5 offers 
shock horror programming exposing everything from plastic surgery to 
prostitution. And the BBC's attempts to jump on the bandwagon while keeping the 
Culture Minister happy would be laughable if they weren't so desperate.

Under scrutiny, the loss of one of our sharpest and best-loved presenters 
seems a Pyrrhic victory indeed. Angus has not behaved well, but if every male 
presenter who offended female sensitivities were removed from our screens, 
they'd be pretty empty: bye bye Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Madeley, most of the 
Panorama team, Vic and Bob, Johnny Vegas and on and on.

Angus's treatment at the hands of his employers, who have profited from his 
delivery of a top-rated show for an unparalleled 12 years, is very twenty-first 
century. Following the first revelations about a tawdry affair, Deayton was 
given a warning to clean up his act, no doubt accompanied by the muffled sound 
of hands rubbing together with glee at the surge in ratings for Have I Got News 
For You.

He seems to have taken the warning to heart. Since the debacle he and his 
partner Lise Meyer have apparently had their phones bugged and been followed 
night and day by men in cheap raincoats brandishing pens instead of pistols. 
Not even a misplaced text message could have escaped such intensive scrutiny. 
That Angus's spurned mistress should decide belatedly to come forward and 
illuminate us on their sordid affair was all too predictable.

TV bosses depend on celebrities' willingness to publicise themselves in order 
to ensure ratings. PR for a project often begins way before the programme 
itself. In Angus's case his early days as host of Have I Got News For You saw a 
media furore over the acrimonious ending of his relationship with Stephanie de 
Sykes.

Neither are his fellow presenters strangers to controversy, and in Paul 
Merton's case a 'party lifestyle'. It would be nice to think they had supported 
their old friend. Instead, like the obedient employees they are, Merton and Ian 
Hislop did what they were told by their producers. After all, their own 
six-figure salaries depended on it. The decision to devote last week's show to 
humiliating Deayton in every conceivable way must have been taken in high 
office. The cynical planting of call girl Caroline Martin in the audience was 
probably a ruse conceived by the programme producers Hat Trick and a complicit 
BBC. It certainly came as manna from heaven to eager journalists under 
instruction to continue the story.

It's ironic that Deayton should be sacked for becoming the show's story. A TV 
presenter unprepared to sell his or her life to the media marketing machine 
can't expect to rise to stellar heights. During my only period of sustained 
tabloid scrutiny, 10 years ago, I was erroneously accused of 'stealing' Anneka 
Rice's husband. Even the papers documenting it knew the story was not all it 
seemed. Nevertheless it made for easy headlines and lots of them. My talents 
didn't increase in conjunction with my column inches but I could have been 
forgiven for imagining they had. I was offered more work in that two-month 
period than ever before or since. TV stations and newspapers were queuing to 
secure this 'scarlet' woman.

With every Tom, Dick and Tara now clamouring to throw themselves, lemming 
like, into the spotlight, celebrity is as easily achieved as it is dispensed 
with. Audiences for reality shows increase in direct proportion to how 
disturbed, smutty or dysfunctional the contestants are. TV stars are expected 
to be multimedia creatures, and if you don't attend movie premieres half-naked 
you'd better come up with something else.

Television has thrown in the towel. It rarely even pays lip service to its 
once brave mission to educate and illuminate. Instead it gives us what we want, 
in much the same vein as the doctors who handed out Valium like Smarties to 
desperate Sixties housewives. No one seemed to mind the screening of Cheryl 
Barrymore's recent exorcism of her miserable marriage to Michael on national 
TV, with its tales of drugs, drink and violence. Tara Palmer-Tomkinson on the 
verge of a nervous breakdown in the Aussie jungle had the nation glued to its 
seats. I'm not complaining - I can always switch off. But for the people who 
are peddling this junk to pretend to be guardians of our moral values is 
throwing a pose too far. TV executives rely on their onscreen employees to 
capture the public imagination by making regular appearances in the tabloids. 
The tabloids rely on TV stars to sell copies. It's racy private lives not 
professionalism that puts bums on sofas.

Now the tabloids are betting on who'll succeed Deayton. They should relax, 
they're bound to be consulted. I doubt the BBC will be scrutinising the 
applicant's moral principles - instead they'll probably be commissioning 
audience research and checking the tabloids to see who would be the 'popular' 
choice.

In a matter of weeks the press have managed to squeeze a resignation from 
Estelle Morris, whose support from the teaching profession was unprecedented, 
destroy the career of a TV presenter, John Leslie, who has yet to be charged 
with any crime, and remove Angus Deayton from our screens. So what that in the 
process they've made it virtually impossible to allow John Leslie, should he 
ever go to court, a fair trial? Or that they ran sneaked pictures of him 'in 
hiding' as though he were a convicted criminal on the run and referred to his 
female companion as a 'busty blonde'. Who's denigrating women there?

Today's media create a culture in which it is acceptable for women to be 
identified by the size of their mammaries and have their personalities 
identified by the colour of their hair. Then they act outraged and start baying 
for blood when men think it's OK to treat women badly. The only UK blood sport 
that needs to be banned is trial by tabloid. But I suppose it's way too popular.
 