
Denis MacShane attended a European conference in Brussels last week. The 
event's main sponsor was the French newspaper, the Nouvel Observateur. Several 
other European papers acted as sponsors too.

I was interested by his revelation that British papers were approached but, 
despite there being no request for funds, were not interested. So I am 
delighted to offer MacShane, a formerLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> minister for Europe, a guest spot 
here to reflect on the absence of our press at the conference.

More than 8,000 people, most of them young, attended three days of debates 
earlier this month around the theme "reinventing Europe".

They heard from not just the great and the good of Europe - such as Jacques 
Delors andValery Giscard d'Estaing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/valery-giscard-destaing>, who bring a curl 
to the lip of true-born English Eurosceptics - but a range of other speakers.

They included novelists Douglas Kennedy from America and Peter Schneider from 
Germany, opera director Gerard Mortier, Nobel peace prize laureate Martti 
Ahtisaari, US senator Peter Galbraith and the chief executives of some of 
France's biggest firms.

The only British politician to attend was the Ukip MEP William Dartmouth. The 
organisers, the left-wing weekly, the Nouvel Observateur, tried hard to get 
Labour MPs or MEPs to come but none, ahem, were available.

They also asked British papers - such as the Guardian, the Independent, the 
Financial Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>, the 
Economist and the New Statesman - to be co-sponsors of the event along with 
Spain's El Pais, Italy's La Repubblica, Belgium's Standard, Poland's Gazeta and 
France's biggest-selling daily, l'Ouest-France.

All the British papers said no, or didn't even bother to reply, despite the 
sponsorship being without payment and the chance to be in the company of some 
of Europe's best papers.

The event, held in the Palais des Beaux Arts in Brussels, was like a giant 
Fabian new year conference or Hay Festival. It was far from a federalists' 
feast. Ideas on what to do about Europe, and what Europe means or should be 
after its unhappy start to the 21st century decade, ricocheted all over the 
spectrum.

Are we to assume from the lack of interest by both Britain's politicians and 
Britain's media that our nation wants no part in the debate now taking place 
between the next generation of Europeans?

Must pro-Europeans in Britain resign themselves to talking to each other? 

Why are Britain's more open-minded journals so wary of being associated with 
European debate when, whether from Warsaw or Madrid, those editors think the 
future of Europe is worth discussing and supporting?

It is a standard trope of English media-political discourse that there is no 
interest in Europe, which leaves the ground open to anti-Europeans.

So we hear non-stop attacks on the EU from Nigel Farage's Ukip and 
Conservative party fellow travellers, as we do from the Europe-hostile press 
owned by off-shore proprietors.

Anti-EU campaign organisations, like Open Europe and Business for Britain, are 
out in force at every opportunity.

But those in favour of European construction appear to cower under the duvet, 
too frightened to utter a word.

Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> is a committed 
pro-European but did not use the word "Europe" in his address to the Labour 
party conference. He is being pulled this way and that on the question of a 
referendum.

In a powerful column in the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/15/eu-referendum-miliband-biggest-dilemma>
 Jackie Ashley urged him to avoid a referendum at all costs. That view isn't 
shared by many, including shadow cabinet members who think the EU referendum is 
a seal-the-deal offer to voters.

Labour's yes-no internal, and relatively private, conflict on an EU referendum 
will continue at least until after the 2014 EU and local government elections 
and the need for Labour to set out its stall to win power in 2015.

So Labour is likely to stick to the view that it's better, for the time being 
at least, to say as little as possible.

The argument is that Europe is low on voters' priorities and there is little 
point in stirring up a Euro hornets' nest.

Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> that remain silent 
are partly responsible for that situation. So, with the next Nouvel Observateur 
conference on Europe scheduled for Athens, may I respectfully ask Alan 
[Rusbridger], Amol [Rajan], Lionel [Barber] and Jason [Cowley] to call its 
editor, Laurent Joffrin, and take part?
 