
Francine Prose, author of Blue Angel and My New American Life

Anna Karenina is probably my favourite novel. More than any other book, it 
persuades me that there is such a thing as human nature, and that some part of 
that nature remains fundamentally unaffected by history and culture. I try to 
re-read it every few years. Each time, perhaps because I'm older and have 
experienced more, I find things I never noticed before. Not only is it a great 
source of pleasure, but I inevitably feel as if I'm getting a sort of pep talk 
from Tolstoy: Go deeper. Try harder. Aim higher. Pay closer attention to the 
world. It's orchestral, symphonic, full of distinctive melodies, parallels and 
variations that keep reappearing, some of which we notice, none of which we 
need to notice in order for them to operate on our subconscious. There are so 
many virtuosic set pieces (the skating party, the ball, the mushroom-picking 
expedition, and, my God, the race during which Vronsky breaks his horse's neck) 
but also small, powerful, resonant moments: I've always loved the scene in 
which Anna, having met the charming Vronksy, returns home to her husband and is 
struck by how unattractive his ears are. How could something like that not 
stand up to, and transcend, the so-called test of time?

William Dalrymple, author of The Last Mughal and Nine Lives

I read Anna Karenina when I was 20. I'd grown up in provincial Scotland, a 
long way from the centre of things. I immediately identified with the Levin 
character – like him, I was more confident with books than I was with parties, 
and constantly losing the girls I was interested in to slicker, hunkier 
Vronsky-like characters. Levin's concern in whether to live in the town or the 
country was something I could completely relate to; I was at university and 
enjoying all the liveliness and intellectual life that Cambridge had to offer, 
but I loved going back to remote Scotland. The tension in the novel between the 
boredom, rootedness and loveliness of the countryside and the excitement but 
vapidity of urban life was something that spoke to me at that age in a way that 
might not make much sense to kids who were brought up in a town. Weird little 
pockets of late-Edwardian Scotland survived into the 1970s – I even knew a few 
people who had been brought up by governesses – so Tolstoy's Russia was not an 
unfamiliar world to me. Tolstoy has that way of introducing characters who we 
recognise from our own experience, which is always the mark of a great 
novelist. I expect if I read the book again now, it would be a very different 
reading. That said, south Asia, where I live now, also has recognisably 
Tolstoyan characteristics, and the kind of feudal characters who appear in 
modern Pakistani literature – especially the short stories of Daniyal 
Mueenuddin – seem to be first cousins of those in Tolstoy.

Jilly Cooper, author of Jump!

Very few men write very well about women, but Tolstoy understood women just as 
well as men – that's what makes the book so interesting. Anna is a wonderful 
character. She comes across as so gorgeous and adorable, and her sex appeal 
radiates down the centuries. But she can't cope with Vronsky at all. At the 
end, she keeps trying to attract young men to make Vronsky jealous – Tolstoy's 
very good on jealousy. And the characters are just so well-rounded. Vronsky is 
a cad, but he's quite silly as well, which is endearing. It was written as a 
serial and that makes it so incredibly readable because of the cliffhangers – 
you desperately want to get on and start the next bit. But it was trashed to 
start off with as a trifling romance of high life. Isn't that awful? I bet 
they're kicking themselves, those critics. It must have shocked people, though 
– there's lots of sex. And Tolstoy obviously knew all the upper classes 
backwards, because he was a member of them and moved in those circles. He 
captures the double standards very well. That's the more terrible aspect of the 
story – Anna's brother shags the nanny and immediately he's forgiven by the 
wife and nobody minds at all, and Vronsky goes back into society and everybody 
goes, "Whoops, oh well, never mind!" But then poor old Anna goes to the theatre 
– that's the worst scene of all – and everybody turns their backs on her. It's 
horrible, horrible.

Mohsin Hamid, author of The Reluctant Fundamentalist

When I finished with college in America, I took a year off to work on my first 
novel and went back to Pakistan with a suitcase full of books I thought I 
should read. Among those books wasAnna Karenina. Very often, I used to turn to 
classic works of literature with a certain degree of apprehension that it would 
bore the pants off me but would be good for me. But that wasn't the case at all 
with Anna Karenina. I thought the story was romantic, passionate, wonderful. 
And as somebody who was trying to write, it was an enormously educational book. 
At first glance it seemed like a very conservative interpretation of what a 
novel could be, but in fact Tolstoy was making some remarkably avant-garde and 
exciting moves as a writer – there is a wonderful chapter or two when you see 
the goings-on from the point of view of Levin's dog. I remember reading the 
crazy farming scenes, where Levin is doing repetitive work with the peasants in 
the field, and thinking, "What's going on here?" What struck me was that, 
through cadence and form and even boredom – Tolstoy deploys boredom quite 
strategically in these big books of his – there was a communication of a 
partial loss of self that can take place in the act of repetitive physical 
labour. It was like finding an east Asian Zen koan buried in the heart of a 
19th-century Russian aristocrat's opus. Today, an editor would say take that 
out, but Tolstoy was fortunate in not existing in the current environment. To 
me, these scenes are signs of an unbridled belief in what a novel can do. There 
are so many facets of this huge intricate thing that can blow you away if you 
stop to look at them.

Julie Myerson, author of Then

In 1979 when I was 18, I left Nottingham (having only ever been abroad once) 
to spend a year as an au pair in Florence. The fat black Penguin edition ofAnna 
Karenina was the only novel I could squeeze into my very small suitcase. My 
memory of reading it – late at night, in a breathtakingly ornate Florentine 
drawing room next to Palazzo Pitti – is still intense. There was a grand piano, 
tall, shuttered windows on to a jasmine-scented courtyard – and I was told the 
Vasari Corridor was on the other side of our yellow painted wall. The novel, 
with its vast panorama of heady, complex and tragic adult emotions – Anna's 
aching passion, but also the touching arc of Levin and Kitty's love, and even 
Dolly's chaotic, overburdened domesticity – seemed to encompass everything that 
lay ahead of me in life. And that room in Florence – lonely, romantic and 
exhilarating all at the same time – seemed somehow irrevocably tangled up with 
every word Tolstoy had written.
 