
Alumni <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/alumni> relations 
would not exist without alumni volunteers. Whether it be graduates from an MBA 
programme serving their business school by contacting their classmates every 
five years for a reunion or the international alum in Istanbul offering to host 
a drinks reception for a visiting faculty member and fellow alumni, they play 
an incredibly valuable role.

Alumni volunteers that enjoy their experience with their alma mater become the 
best referral agents to their peers and other alumni for getting involved. They 
evaluate the 'user experience' and the value of the services alumni relations 
may offer upon graduation (such as access to the library, fitness facilities, 
and the careers office). And they more readily speak their mind and share their 
experience with with alumni relations officers. By nature of their role working 
closely with staff, they also become familiar with the fundraising goals for 
their institution and can be strong advocates for support.

But however informal the arrangement, job descriptions for volunteer 
opportunities that alumni find themselves raising their hands for (or getting 
pulled into) can benefit them. Job descriptions are especially effective in 
times of transition for alumni. When they move cities, jobs, or have other 
personal obligations and must give up their position, having a job description 
to share with potential successors provides information in a timely way and 
helps the university to recruit the right alumni to fulfil vacancies.

So, what are the basic components of a volunteer job description and how can 
it benefit the alumni programme? Since we are working with volunteers nothing 
is mandatory, including their own commitment. Which is why I think it's wise to 
manage a volunteer's expectations. A job description provides a clear 
understanding of roles and responsibilities of those involved in a project. It 
lets volunteers know exactly what is expected of them and also what they can 
expect from the institution in return.

A clearly defined role provides clarity about what is expected, provides the 
volunteer written documentation of what they strive to accomplish, the areas to 
which they will be accountable.

A good brief also professionalises the entire volunteer process for alumni. 
Most staff and alumni will be familiar with job descriptions. Longstanding 
relationships with alumni need ongoing investment and resources. Job 
descriptions for both alumni leaders and for those one-time volunteers that 
serve the community on behalf of alma mater should be developed, promoted and 
regularly revised.

Descriptions that I've drawn up in the past have included the name of the 
volunteer opportunity, the time commitment, term of service, the programme 
description and the staff contact and support services.

When universities cannot pay alumni for their time and talent, they can at 
least provide an easily accessible document that spells out the roles and 
responsibilities for their involvement. Success and satisfaction by alumni for 
completing a 'nice little job' leads to greater satisfaction and, hopefully, 
more peer referrals and invitation for getting involved.

Gretchen Dobson is a global strategist at Gretchen Dobson Go Global 
<http://www.gdgoglobal.com> and formerly worked as Tufts University's senior 
associate director for domestic and international programs. Gretchen will also 
be leading the next Guardian Higher Education Network seminar;Alumni relations 
- a masterclass <http://alumnimanc.eventbrite.co.uk/> in Manchester on 29 June

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 