
To love someone, is it wise to know everything about them? No. It's not even 
wise to know everything about one's children's first seconds of life – believe 
me, it's not pretty – and that's before we get to teenage years and friending 
them on Facebook. After a while, and for most of its existence, love persists 
despite disclosure, not because of it.

I love cricket. I love its spectacular moments. I love its brutal confounding 
of expectations. I love the opportunities it affords for reflection. I love its 
early morning etherealness. I love… well, you get the picture. But there are 
aspects of the game about which I need to know, but about which I do not want 
to know everything – like the birth of a second child.

These thoughts came to mind over the last couple of weeks, during which 
cricket's media has been dominated by two important, but utterly unromantic, 
stories: the ICC's Governance Paper and the sacking ofKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>.

Both stories feel like hard work – and, since I write for pleasure, not work, 
I've largely walked away from them. I've read enough to know that there is 
plenty of good journalism on both of these important developments (amid the 
screeching tweets), but I've read only enough to colour in a little of the 
context.

Crudely put, the ICC story is the kind of power politics imbroglio with which 
I just can't engage. And Test cricket's demise has been forecast so often and 
for so long that I can barely raise an eyebrow if it's forecast today. I can't 
believe that it's about to be swept under Twenty20′s carpeting of the game and 
if it isn't, well, the rest is just detail.

Pietersen's ousting has all the hallmarks of grubby office politics that 
interested me not an iota in real life, nor in the kinds of soaps (and reality 
TV these days) in which clandestine meetings are held and someone gets the 
bullet.

I love cricket because it's all the things real life isn't – and yet it 
continuously improves on real life, throwing light on the slings and arrows of 
outrageous fortune as it unfolds as a great unscripted beautiful drama worthy 
of the masters of the form.

It's an extraordinary banquet overflowing with all the things one shouldn't 
eat, but one does. The ICC and KP courses? They feel like overcooked broccol – 
I'm going back for a bit more tortellini con funghi e tartufi.

I felt this way once before. In 1984, I read the Guardian sometimes from cover 
to cover (you could in university vacations supported by a full grant, housing 
benefit and unemployment pay) but I read barely a word about the Great Miners' 
Strike. Like cricket's dominating narrative of 2014, I knew where I stood; I 
knew the details would be gory and I knew the end would be messy. I turned the 
page to read Matthew Engel's report of Northants v Lancashire. I'm still doing 
the same now.

• This article first appeared on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor on Twitter <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 