
To get anywhere in the arts you need a following: a crowd of people who 
support you and your work. These are the people who will eventually, if you are 
lucky, set you on a path to making a living from your creative talents.

Visual artists build up a following by throwing free drinks parties on the 
opening night of each exhibition they have. These previews – or private views, 
as they are known in the trade – have a dual benefit of being both highly 
sociable and incredibly important networking events.

The first few private views of your work will probably be during your time at 
college, and they will involve you and 10 other students quaffing a few cans of 
cheap lager. But these boozy nights will grow throughout your career. At their 
pinnacle a lucky few artists get to hold golden ticket parties that go on for 
several days, with limousine parking services and a heavy security presence.

But let's begin at the beginning: these shenanigans are essentially networking 
events where artists and crafts people can meet kindred spirits and bond with 
new founds friends over a common love of art and warm white wine.

Nick Fox is an artist and a lecturer in Fine Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> at Newcastle University. "When 
new students arrive at Newcastle one of the first things we do is get them to 
see art work in the real. Often they've only ever seen some of their favoured 
artists on the internet, so it's really important for them to start to get a 
sense of the physicality of the work – how it was actually made and how it has 
been displayed," he says.

"But, after that, the real purpose of sending them along to private views is 
to get them to start building the networks that will sustain them throughout 
their career. The students become a tribe, they do things together."

Not everyone who goes to art school becomes an artist. Some become critics, 
curators, commissioners, art handlers, gallery workers, dealers, picture 
framers – all useful contacts for budding artists.

Matt Hale, presenter of Art Monthly Magazine's talk show 
<http://www.artmonthly.co.uk/magazine/site/events/category/talk-show> on 
Resonance FM, says that private views are an incredibly important part of the 
art world: "If they were suddenly to stop it would make a huge difference."

Attending private views is about choosing a tribe and joining it, according to 
Hale. "You get a kind of touring village of people who go to certain galleries 
– a kind of treaded map – and you will see the same people on that circuit over 
and over again," he explains.

"Other groups go to other openings at other galleries on a different circuit. 
If you went toTimothy Taylor Gallery <http://www.timothytaylorgallery.com/> in 
Mayfair you wouldn't meet the same tribe as you would meet in an artist-run 
space in Deptford, South London, such asEnclave <http://enclaveprojects.com/>. 
There is some overlap, but it's tiny. Really they are different worlds."

Lesser known artists generally hold open parties with cheap or free bars to 
try and draw in the punters. If you know the time, the date and the address 
then you can get in. The fact that someone has told you when and where the 
party is means you must be well-enough connected to be worthy of a place.

When you are first starting out, and the tickets aren't flooding through your 
door, you will need to do a few people a few favours. People higher up the 
chain – gallery owners, critics and curators – will have far more invitations 
than they need. If they ask you for your help – if they ask you to watch their 
gallery for a couple of hours, to help serve drinks or to take some photographs 
for them – ask them for some of their spare private view tickets in return, on 
top of your payment.

"There is a kind of quid pro quo, a certain moral obligation to support 
someone who has supported you," says Fox. "Turning up and being a considerate 
audience at one of their artists openings is important. Buyers and curators 
like to see that the artist they are considering investing in can draw a crowd. 
Gallerist like to know people's faces. Going to private views gets your face 
known and makes gallerists more sympathetic when you approach them with a 
proposal."

"My students organise a private view in London every year to introduce 
themselves to the scene in the capital. They invite curators, gallerists, 
critics, they sell work – it's how things get done," says Fox. "It's a big 
financial commitment, but for what they get back in terms of sales and getting 
signed up by galleries it is more than worth it."

• To find out more about this summer's Newcastle University London show, go to 
nclfineart2013.com <http://www.nclfineart2013.com/>.
 