
I’m nearing middle age and I’m living out of a bag. Have been for a couple of 
years now. And I couldn’t be happier with this arrangement.


According to “the rules”, this is not how things are meant to be. Especially 
at my age. Rest assured though, I’m not at home alone at night tucking into a 
lonely microwave frozen ready meal for one, lamenting what could have been. I 
like this latest turn of events. I ditched the emotional and physical weight of 
all the things I’ve accumulated over the years and embraced my inner nomad.

Think of it as a cleanse, of sorts, minus the green vegetable juice that 
tastes like a mixture of dirt, tree leaves and self-loathing. Given those 
concoctions sell for around 15 bucks a pop, this new approach to life is 
cheaper too.

I do reminisce about the nice things I used to own and what it might be like 
to have them all around me once again now that I’m back living in Australia. 
But frankly, but I’ve moved so often (22 times so far in life) I can’t be arsed 
with carting most of it around any more. Being unencumbered by “stuff” is my 
new jam.

I tried to fight my inner Littlest Hobo most of my adult life. In an attempt 
to settle, I bought a house (it was mainly the bank’s but I liked to pretend it 
was my own). The homeowner’s desire to nest didn’t arrive at my place along 
with the congratulatory bottle of cheap booze from the real estate agent upon 
purchase. My feet were itchy. A few years later I went for broke and moved 
overseas. With just one bag. I returned with the same bag. I hope not to add to 
it for a while.

I blame my early, happy childhood for this. Our formative years set patterns 
for life. I never wanted a sports car or a hot blonde on my arm, so this must 
be my mid-life regression.

Some of my happiest memories come from when our family stayed in a converted 
tram on the banks of the Darling river, New South Wales, in the late 70s. The 
tram was bought for $400 from the Melbourne city council and shipped up on the 
back of a truck. There wasn’t room for toys and life was pretty basic (drop 
toilet included). Most evenings were finished off with a glass of 50/50 
cordial, a shared can of Tom Piper’s Vegetables & Sausages and bananas and 
chocolate wrapped in foil cooked on the campfire for dinner.

I think I've yearned for that simplicity ever since.

Not accumulating chattels isn’t really the Australian way. We’re brought up 
with the dream of buying a house and filling it. In London I was surprised that 
most rental properties are already fully or partly furnished before you move 
in. Life is more transient. People go where the work is. More workers are on 
contracts rather than on permanent staff these days. The dream of owning your 
own home is out of reach now for most.

This is also the case in Australia. Yet we persist with it, hoping for a 
magical windfall to one day get on that ladder. It’s depressing and frustrating 
for many. Perhaps the old dream doesn’t fit so well?

I say all this as my possessions sit in storage. Maybe, like the yoga I tried 
four times and the Flywheel classes I enrolled in and never went to, I’ll 
probably cave and give up trying to live like the true hobo I think I am. But I 
do know that when my pets and my partner finally arrive on these shores, we 
will truly be home, wherever we are. I couldn't care that our home has only a 
battered suitcase, some chipped crockery and someone else’s dining table in it.
 