
Antoni Gaudí <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> 
(1852-1926), architect of the awesome basilica consecrated by Pope Benedict in 
Barcelona on Sunday 7 November, didn't think he was building Europe's last 
great Catholic cathedral. The Sagrada Família, he said, was the first of the 
new Christian era. He built it to speak to a post-industrial, secularised 
world, to heal the divide between faith and reason, truth and freedom, art and 
God; and to do so not through a restatement of the past but starting from 
creation itself.

We have long been familiar with the Sagrada's towers and facades, the way the 
building erupts from Barcelona's suburbs, reaching for the skies. But on the 
day it was consecrated, thanks to a spidercam deftly directed by the local 
television station, TV3, millions saw for the first time the recently-completed 
interior – a thrilling petrified forest of light, colour and space. The 
Basilica's modernity, as Pope Benedict observed in his homily, lies in the way 
Gaudí internalises what is usually left outside – plants, animals, nature – 
while putting on its outside what is normally confined within church walls: 
altarpieces and sculptures narrating the Christian salvation story.

In an age when "modern" art strains to reject and disconcert for its own sake, 
Gaudí's originality stands out as far more radical and authentic. Focussing 
intensely on the forms of nature, he discovered that true beauty lies in 
uncovering and being faithful to those forms, rather than striving after 
beauty, which results merely in artifice. Through dozens of 65ft-high tropical 
trunks rising up to a forest-like canopy through which the sun's rays pour and 
dance across the walls, the Sagrada's interior creates a heavenly vision of the 
New Jerusalem – not a ponderous, grandiloquent, statement of a powerful 
institution, but a glimpse of God, something free and light and generous and 
intensely beautiful, a space fit for soaring spirits.

Gaudí's own life is a very modern one. He ignored his Catholic faith until he 
was 42, by which time he was a famous and well-paid architect, something of a 
dandy courted by wealthy Barcelona industrialists to design their show-off 
houses. He was the leading light of the Catalan movement of arts and crafts 
known as the Renaixença, and knew he was far ahead of his generation. But he 
was knocked off course by being rejected by a woman he loved, and began to 
explore – in a very modern, considered way, in full knowledge of the 
alternatives – the beliefs in which he had until then shown little interest. 
Over the next 30 years, he shed his wealth, spent more and more time in prayer, 
gave up meat and alcohol, put his money into improving the lot of the poor of 
his barrio, and dedicated himself entirely to the Sagrada Família, convinced 
that God had called him to this great task. He died, after being run over by a 
tram aged 72, a beloved pauper, lauded as genius and admired as a saint.

The church is now on its way to officially declaring him one, not because of 
his magnificent creation – although, of course, the Sagrada cannot be separated 
from his faith – but because of the evidence and fruits of a life geared to 
God. Unlike other geniuses such as Picasso (who loathed Gaudí for ideological 
reasons but was indebted to his art) or Mozart, Gaudí never burned out. He 
understood that artistic genius was a powerful gift, which led to a reckless 
ego; he actively compensated for that gift through penance and expiation, 
self-sacrifice and giving. Convinced that God is revealed first through His 
creation, his faith led his genius and technical prowess ever deeper into the 
origins of beauty, not away from them. At a time when technological progress 
leads to arrogance, Gaudí offers leaves and lizards, eggs and branches, and 
asks us to look again.

That is why Gaudí the saint and his great Basilica are the perfect signposts 
for the contemporary church to place in the path of the modern seeker. And they 
offer a way out of the wounds of Spain's civil war, still seen in the tragic 
division between left and right, Catholics and anticlericals. Gaudí was a 
catalanista, arrested in the 1920s for refusing to speak Castilian to an army 
officer. Catalan nationalism has always been close to the local church, and the 
sight of the pope using Catalan at the mass at the Sagrada Família, symbol of 
Catalan pride, pours balm on old wounds.

Gaudí's great basilica has been built, mostly, from the entrance fees from 
Europe's agnostic tourists: it attracts 2 million visitors a year, more than 
the Prado and the Alhambra. They come, in the age of The Da Vinci Code, curious 
about symbols and signs, and find that the Sagrada Família, perhaps the 
greatest attempt since Dante to condense the whole of Christian teaching into a 
single work, is packed with them. Yet there is nothing opaque about it. Unlike 
St Peter's in Rome, which conceals and intimidates as much as it gives glory, 
Barcelona's basilica opens up in its entirety the moment you step inside – the 
perfect space for a culture suspicious of institutions, but which is restless 
for something greater than ourselves.
 