
‘Why do people of different religions go to war with each other?” the boy 
asked me. He must have been 12 or 13. I was out of my depth, doing a Q&A with 
RE pupils at a school in Suffolk. They were supposed to be asking me about 
comedy, except none of them cared what it was like to perform on Live at the 
Apollo; watching me squirm as I tried not to offend anyone’s religious beliefs 
was much funnier. They were asking me big questions: if God exists why does he 
allow bad things to happen? Why had it taken so long for gay people to have the 
right to marry? They asked about abortion laws, and now war. These were all 
topics that they had been exploring on their school’s RE syllabus and questions 
I couldn’t answer.

“Um, sometimes, if you think you know the answer to what happens after you 
die, like, um, heaven or paradise or something, and you are trying to tell 
other people about it, then, well, you might end up killing them when you’re 
trying to convince them you’re right,” I answered, really, really badly. I was 
trying to make war sound as if it’s a religious conversation gone wrong, as if 
everyone shooting and stabbing each other means well, really. The boy did not 
look impressed. “That’s not what I meant,” he explained. “What I meant was: why 
do different religions fight against each other? Why don’t they all get 
together and kill atheists?”

We all laughed and clapped his chilling suggestion, and I went home thinking 
about how brilliant it is that, no matter what the faith of their family, 
children in the UK have a safe space in their education in which to learn about 
the different religions of the world and to debate difficult questions. 
Questions without definite answers.

This week, I found out that that boy’s prospective war would be pretty evenly 
matched in the UK. Atwo-year Woolf Institute commission headed by Baroness 
Butler-Sloss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/07/key-symbols-of-the-establishment-must-reflect-modern-britain-says-report>
 has found that around half of British people do not consider themselves to 
belong to any faith. I found this surprising, because it is 8 December and 
every shop on every high street is ejaculating tinsel for a month-long 
celebration of capitalism  a Christian festival. Christmas is inescapable in 
this country, from the music on the radio to the designs on coffee cups to the 
complete lockdown on the day itself. Participation is mandatory, even by 
osmosis. In any department store, Christianity is assumed.

The commission produced a report calling for better integration and 
representation of non-Christian faith in the media, which sounds sensible and 
interesting. And more diversity in the House of Lords, with imams and rabbis 
replacing some bishops, which sounds like fewer people turning up in the same 
outfit. They also proposed that Thought for the Day on Radio 4 should include 
some non-religious thoughts, which is a bit sillier. If you are a faithless 
heathen like myself all thoughts are non-religious, even religious ones. We can 
enjoy the stories and teachings of any doctrine as myth or philosophy, and be 
provoked and entertained. There are so few spaces in the media where religious 
thought is presented that it’s a shame to erode that tiny window. More 
controversial, perhaps, is the suggestion that Christian prayer in schools be 
replaced with a “time for reflection”, and that faith schools should be phased 
out.

That, of course, angered some in the Anglican church; the Church of England 
claimed the report had been “hijacked” by humanists. As a non-believer who was 
made to bow her head in school assembly every day, I can assure them that what 
they’re fighting for here is compliance, not souls. I always wanted to look 
around in the moment of prayer and enjoy the peace and quiet, and so I would 
get told off in a shouted whisper. My hands would be gently forced together and 
into them I would mouth “I don’t believe in you” to the arrogant cloud guy 
always getting me in trouble because I wasn’t convinced. It hardened my 
disbelief for a long time. It was the flexible Christians I met as an adult who 
opened my mind to theological thought for the first time.

While all religious beliefs should be respected, choice is a human right. As 
the state wiggles to make more room for the rising number of British people who 
follow non-Christian religions, this process should be hijacked to ensure that 
children of different religions get to know and understand each other, and that 
all schools promote education in a variety of belief systems, as well as the 
reasons that humans evolved to have them. For all of the separateness of church 
and state, Christian morality has shaped Britain and its inhabitants for a very 
long time. That’s not going anywhere. All those school hymns are probably the 
reason I’m such a compassionate non-murderer now.

So why don’t all religions get together and go to war with atheists? Because 
we all want the same thing: respect and tolerance and not to be forced to do 
anything we don’t want to. Belief is invisible, so there is enough space for 
everyone’s. Except in the shops at Christmas.
 