
Q I am a 30-year-old student in the final year of a PhD. Before I began my 
course I had held two positions in the charity and NGO sector. I have also done 
a lot of voluntary work in the social sector. I took up the PhD as I was 
offered a full scholarship, but I'm not interested in an academic career. I 
would rather put my knowledge to some practical use in a policy environment or 
similar. But will my PhD be a help or a hindrance on graduation? I fear it will 
be the latter.

As I am 30, not yet a homeowner and don't have any savings I don't feel 
financially able to accept very low-paid jobs. But I also do not have any 
experience managing staff or high-level management experience, which I suspect 
will be required for the NGO or charity sector at the level I want to enter. 
I've also considered the civil service, but wonder if the PhD will be 
problematic - and also what the chances of climbing this particular ladder at 
my age might be.

A Coming to the end of your course must be causing you anxiety, but you should 
realise you're in a fantastic position. You have work experience in a relevant 
sector - both paid and as a volunteer - and are about to finish your PhD 
without a great mountain of debt. Plenty of people would be happy to be in your 
shoes.

But you are feeling the pressures of time and money. Which is fair enough, 
particularly if you are seeing your peers earning decent cash, with their own 
homes, and making concrete plans for the future. However, you are not exactly 
ancient - I'm sure the civil service will not be out of bounds simply because 
your age begins with a '3'. And consider how you will compare with new 
graduates: even if you start on the same level, the experience you gained from 
your two years working in the charity/NGO sector, plus your skills from serious 
academic research, means you should be confident of progressing quickly.

I think maybe it is worth applying that thought to all the jobs at which you 
are looking. I know you want economic security and aren't prepared to accept a 
low salary, but you need to look beyond the starting salary: you don't have 
large amounts of debt to service, or indeed rising mortgage payments, so it is 
worth looking at opportunities that might not give you a great return 
immediately, but could open doors within the next couple of years.

You say, for example, that you want to enter at a certain level, but don't 
have the workplace skills to support this. To gain them you might have to drop 
your salary expectations initially - if only to allow your academic and 
professional skills to even up. Don't make the mistake of supposing that 
academic study always equates to a higher salary.

Finally, you wonder about being over-qualified for jobs. My feeling is that 
completing further study is not abnormal in the sectors you have chosen to 
explore. In any case, you have that most perfect (and actually fairly rare) 
thing: a straightforward explanation for all your choices. You worked in the 
sector, got involved, enjoyed it, but wanted to move into policy so did the 
study to allow that. PhDs become an issue when they are not backed up by any 
experience of working life. You have the complete package, so stop worrying!
 