
Venus Williams was asked just after she had won her fifth Wimbledon title last 
summer against her sister Serena whether this was the beginning of a sisterly 
second coming. "I would really love that," she replied. A couple of months 
later Serena became the US Open champion for a third time, and now the younger 
of the American siblings is the overwhelming favourite to win Saturday's first 
women's eveningAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final against Dinara Safina 
of Russia.

It will be a winner-takes-all final to usurp Serbia's Jelena Jankovic as the 
world No1, though few would currently argue against the assertion thatSerena 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>, when she puts her 
body and mind to it, is overwhelmingly the best player in the world. Victory 
against Safina, last year's beaten French Open finalist, would see Williams lay 
claim to her fourth Australian Open title, and her 10th slam in total, taking 
her clear in seventh place in the all-time list, two behind Billie Jean King.

Richard Williams, her father, remarked that Serena's victory over Jankovic in 
New York last autumn reminded him of "a cross between a pit bull, a young Mike 
Tyson, and an alligator". It was not exactly a flattering analogy, but you took 
his point. She is a supreme competitor, as she showed again against Russia's 
Elena Dementieva in their semi-final, played in the Rod Laver Arena with the 
roof closed because of the intense heat.

Dementieva, last year's singles gold medal winner at the Beijing Olympics, but 
without a slam title, had won their last three matches, and had displayed the 
sort of form that suggested she might be able to make it a fourth.

The Williams sisters took the power game to a new level, forcing their rivals 
to ever higher levels of fitness, though it has taken its toll. Justin Henin 
retired last year, while Maria Sharapova, the only Russian to have beaten 
Serena in a slam final, is currently recovering from a shoulder operation.

Venus and Serena have always been sparing with the number of tournaments they 
play, and have been roundly criticised for it, yet they appear to be having the 
last laugh, with 16 grand slam titles between them. Chris Evert tore Serena off 
a strip for not putting 100% into tennis, only to retract after last year's US 
Open: "It's opened my eyes not to be judgmental and to each his own. Whatever 
makes you happy. By having other interests, maybe you won't get burned out so 
quickly," she said.

Dementieva reached the finals of both the French and US Opens in 2004 when her 
suspect serve first came under the harshest light of scrutiny. It has improved 
immensely since then but when the pressure is ratcheted up, as it was against 
Williams, the old cracks appeared and she double faulted eight times.

The 27-year-old Muscovite, who had won the two build-up tournaments in 
Auckland and Sydney, lives her tennis on the edge, as her squeals of 
frustration on the centre court indicated. Serena was more inclined to growl 
like a bear with a sore head when matters were not going quite right. Many of 
the rallies were of the highest quality, though women's tennis is desperate for 
a player gifted enough, and brave enough, to vary the baseline bombardment.

Safina took some time to emerge from the shadow of her more illustrious 
brother, Marat Safin, the former US Open and Australian Open champion. Should 
she beat Williams, and the Russian has won only one of their previous six 
matches, then she and Marat would become the first brother and sister to win a 
slam title. The last significant match between Safina and Williams was in the 
semi-finals of last year's US Open when Serena won 6–3, 6–2, and although the 
Russian's improvement over the last year has been considerable, taking her to 
No3 in the world, Safina continues to look shaky under extreme pressure.

That said she battled through against Australia's Jelena Dokic and a partisan 
crowd in the quarter-finals, and overcame fellow Russian Vera Zvonareva 6–3, 
7–6(4) in the semis today. She will need to stay fully aggressive thoughout 
against Williams, something Dementieva felt she had not succeeded in doing, 
though nobody could fault her physical commitment. Safina is nowhere near as 
mobile as Dementieva, while Williams appeared to be playing well within 
herself. The simple truth is that Serena is the better player. "My goal is not 
to be No 1, it is to win the title." It will be a major shock, in a women's 
tournament lacking upsets, if Safina won.
 