
Christmas, even in a recession, is by far the busiest time of year for selling 
books – and this Christmas is a crucial test of whether Waterstone's will have 
a significant future selling our books in Britain. Its history over the last 30 
years has been part of my career. I felt an extraordinary excitement walking 
round the new bookshops in the 1980s. They appeared to herald a revolution in 
the future of bookselling. I had no intimation it might be the sudden 
brilliance of a star before it vanishes in a black hole.

I liked the way these bookshops engaged themselves with writers. There were 
occasional misadventures, but they merely added to the fun. In 1990 I was 
invited to take part in a "Waterstone's literary debate" at the Law Society 
hall in London's Chancery Lane;William Boyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/william-boyd>, Anthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> and AS Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt> were up against Richard Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/richard-holmes>, Philip Ziegler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Ziegler> and me. The novelists were to 
propose George Gissing's statement that "The only good biographies are to be 
found in novels."

I can remember the champagne reception and the red wine at dinner, but little 
of the debate afterwards, which was chaired by founder Tim Waterstone. When my 
turn came to speak, finding difficulty in rising to my feet, I attempted to 
address the audience from a semi-recumbent position with the result that few 
people could see or hear me. Ziegler, who had flown in from the US, rose to his 
feet and quickly concluded our case. The losing team was presented with more 
champagne.

I was more careful at Waterstone's literary lunches round the country and at 
the yearly receptions given at the Royal Geographical Society in aid of 
International PEN. Waterstones also published several anthologies. One of them 
contained writers' descriptions of Christmas. My contribution recalled a 
horrific family gathering. Will Self called Christmas "a hideous synergy 
between decadent immaterialism and material decadence", Jonathan Coe expressed 
his gratitude that there was only one of these happenings per year, and the 
collection included an excerpt from Monty Python'sLife of Brian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36114/life-of-brian>.

Let's hope this Christmas will be happier occasion for James Daunt's new 
Waterstones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/may/20/waterstones-future-james-daunt-books>
. Good Christmas sales will mean that his radical changes – scrapping the 
ridiculous three-for-two discounts and the policy of "returns", adding cafes to 
over a hundred branches and steering his bookshop towards a modern "click and 
collect" digital market-place – have been successful and that Waterstones has 
an active future.

Writers' living standards partly depend on his success. Over 60 years ago, 
Cyril Connolly's Horizon magazine printed a questionnaire about writers' living 
standards: whether they could earn a living income from writing books, what 
might be a suitable second occupation, and whether the state should do more for 
writers. Waterstone's asked the same questions at the end of the 20th century.

In Horizon, everyone agreed it had been difficult for authors to earn a living 
from their books at any time. As for secondary occupations, Robert Graves 
suggested that, like Trollope, they could take employment in a post office or, 
like WH Davies, solve their problems by becoming professional tramps. Stephen 
Spender was attracted towards being an "office clown", Herbert Read fancied a 
bit of "light engineering" and George Orwell recommended "composing propaganda 
for bodies such as the British Council". They were divided over state 
involvement. Several argued that the state should invest in the book business 
by assisting public libraries and removing the tax on books.

Among the Waterstone's contributors, I advised writers to manoeuvre themselves 
into the wills of prosperous elderly friends (no more far fetched than 
Connolly's advice to get Hollywood book contracts). Will Self came up with an 
ingenious scheme for the government to pay some would-be authors not to write. 
I wanted to see a public lending right fund for the borrowing of books from 
libraries increased tenfold. As for secondary jobs, Jenny Diski recommended 
becoming a lighthouse keeper or poacher, Penelope Lively chose watch-repairing 
or picture-framing, Hilary Mantel preferred the prospect of being a 
fortune-teller or steering supermarket trolleys andMichael Ignatieff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/michael-ignatieff> dreamed of serving as a 
waiter at a beachfront restaurant or filling the role of UN secretary general.

Much of the interest centred on the income writers felt they needed. I chose 
Elizabeth Bowen as my guide. In Horizon, she had settled on £3,500 a year as 
reasonable and I followed her example – though, to my astonishment, this was 
calculated in 1998 as being equivalent to £70,000. Among other optimists, Blake 
Morrison hesitated agonisingly between £8,000 and £80,000, Self between £40,000 
and £80,000 and Julian Barnes between £5,000 and £100,000.

To celebrate its apparent success, Waterstone's bought the lease of the 
Simpsons clothes store in Piccadilly and in the autumn of 1999 opened what was 
the largest bookshop in Europe. A brochure welcoming customers showed Norman 
Mailer signing a book next to a quotation from Keats: "Give me books, fruit, 
French wine and fine weather and a little music out of doors, played by 
somebody I do not know." Much of this the shop hoped to supply over its 54,000 
sq ft and seven floors of retail space. It was opened with the unveiling of a 
commemorative plaque carrying a "permanent tribute" to writers who represented 
"the success of Waterstone's and the quality of our literary life". The writers 
brought together included Beryl Bainbridge, JG Ballard, Margaret Drabble, 
Sebastian Faulks, Kazuo Ishiguro, John le Carré, Doris Lessing, Terry 
Pratchett, Salman Rushdie, Richard Dawkins and David Hare.

I had welcomed Tim Waterstone's initiative and the fact that he had seen off 
WH Smith (a newsagent pretending to be a bookshop) as the dominant bookselling 
chain. But in 1993 he sold the company to Smith's. For me he had been an 
inspiration, but to others he now seemed a maverick figure who had benefited 
from the boom years. The HMV Group then bought Waterstone's and in 2005 moved 
to take over the Ottakar's chain of bookshops. I joined a small Society of 
Authors group that, under the leadership ofAntony Beevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antony-beevor>, went to the Office of Fair 
Trading to argue that this would restrict fair competition.

Ottakar's, created by Tintin enthusiast James Heneage in 1987, specialised in 
local books and centred its shops in small towns where there were no 
Waterstone's. It complemented rather than confronted the Waterstone's empire. 
But the Competition Commission rejected our argument on the grounds that there 
was no evidence a takeover would increase book prices. To my mind this was an 
irrelevant answer. As we had feared, a number of bookshops were soon closed.

But Waterstone's seemed to have little sense of the digital revolution 
overtaking the world of books and the online market that Amazon would dominate. 
It kept afloat partly by charging publishers huge prices for putting books in 
its windows and partly by taking advantage of the end of retail price 
maintenance. This led to the decline of independent high street bookshops and 
enabled Waterstone's to offer cut-price paperbacks and 
three-for-the-price-of-two books. At a seminar held in the Piccadilly branch in 
2009, one of the staff explained that someone coming in for a thriller or some 
romantic fiction would pick up a free volume of poems. When Wendy Cope asked 
where the poetry was kept, there was some confusion in locating it in a corner 
of the ground floor. The central space was occupied by stationery because 
customers, we were told, preferred writing to reading what elitist authors had 
written.

The engagement between writers and booksellers had been completely lost. I 
suggested renewing it with a small party for the writers named on Waterstone's 
plaque and taking photographs of the happy event as an advertisement for 
continuity. This caused some bewilderment. What plaque did I have in mind? The 
one, I said, near the entrance from Piccadilly. No one knew what I was talking 
about. We went downstairs – and there it was behind a display of works by Dawn 
French.

Don't look for it now. Our "permanent tribute" has vanished.
 