
Will Arnett has had his share of ups and downs. As an actor he's had shows 
pulled out from beneath his feet and, as Gob Bluth, he came up with the idea of 
Mr Bananagrabber. But now, with the surprise resurrection ofArrested Development
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> and a 
well-adjusted lead role in new sitcomThe Millers 
<http://www.comedycentral.co.uk/shows/featured/the-millers>, he's in a pretty 
good place. So it seemed like an ideal time to tap the man for some blue-sky 
dreaming.

1 LOOSEN THAT STIFF UPPER LIP

I can relate to your British sensibility. It comes from a very real place. 
It's a societal idea of weathering wars and hardship yet still marching forward 
even in the most difficult times. But my advice would be: you got through all 
that! It's time to live a little and enjoy it! And you know what? Here's the 
other thing: you guys spend a lot of time hungover. And that's hard. So maybe 
don't drink so much?

2 YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT

The last time I was in the UK, the food was actually so much better than when 
I was over there as a kid. That said, when I was a kid it was awful. Today it 
feels like British tastes are leading the charge in many areas, but you still 
eat too many sweets. How about you eat fewer sweets? You guys spend so much 
time on a sugar high, and then you crash. It's like the hangover thing. You 
people just have too many crashes, you're on a constant rollercoaster.

3 WATCH TV AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE…

This really is a golden age of television and I think that one thing you could 
do to become happier is embrace how much television you watch. Too many people 
try to downplay it. Those people should be shamed at every turn. If more people 
watch more TV, then we'll get even more good TV. So on your digital recording 
device, you really have to record as much TV as you possibly can.

4 …AND DON'T GO AND MAKE A CUP OF TEA DURING THE COMMERCIALS

Embrace TV advertising; they're artists as well, these people who make 
commercials and the people who star in them. They are allowing you to sit in 
your own home, in your most comfortable sweatpants, and be entertained. Instead 
of rejecting the fine products that bring you these shows, you should enjoy 
them. Whether it be a soft drink, a crisps manufacturer, a favourite lager or 
simply just a delicious Curly Wurly.

5 MANAGE YOUR CAREER EXPECTATIONS

The key to happiness in your career is to set the bar at a reasonable height. 
Give yourself low thresholds to reach and be constantly delighted with the 
slightest victory. Then once you start notching a few victories, you'll get the 
taste of it. That way you can turn yourself into a warrior.

6 LEARN TO MANAGE DOMINEERING PERSONALITIES

In The Millers, my character Nathan Miller is a normal guy who got divorced 
but made the conscious decision to move forward with his life. He's a pretty 
relatable guy; I don't think he's as untethered from the world as some of the 
other characters I've played. But then his parents also split up, and Nathan's 
mother moves into his apartment, and she's a very controlling personality. And 
that's very daunting, especially if it's your mother. I think sometimes you 
have to take an eastern, zen approach with people who are domineering like 
that. Maybe the best way is just to forgive them every day for what they do. 
Every morning, say: "I know that's how they are, I'm not going to change them, 
I forgive them." And you might make it easier on yourself. Because fighting it 
is very difficult.

7 BE WARY OF THOSE WHO TELL YOU THAT LAUGHTER IS THE BEST MEDICINE

I always reject that. I always say, any place that tells you laughter is the 
best medicine, I really hope that it's not my local hospital. Because that 
operating room would be pure madness if it was just people telling jokes while 
you had to get your gall bladder removed. I'm really a proponent of medicine 
being the best medicine.

8 ACCEPT THAT SOCIAL MEDIA IS A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD

We experience all the highs and delights of being constantly informed, but 
we're too concerned with the future rather than enjoying the moment. Maybe if 
we just lobotomised our digital connectivity a little bit we might experience 
some actual joy. Before the internet, we did so many amazing and creative 
things. In fact, we created the internet.

9 DON'T WORRY, BE HAPPY

I'm 43 years old. I don't look a day over 42. And if I've learned anything at 
this stage in my life, it's that you have to have fun. The ability to laugh 
every day is truly the tonic for this life. When you are on your deathbed, 
looking back at the stupid fucking things that you worried about, that gave you 
such anxiety and were actually so pointless … if you could just enjoy yourself 
and have a good time, I think you would pass quietly with a smile. Unless, of 
course, you are murdered in your sleep.

The Millers starts 14 Oct, 9.30pm, on Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> Central
 