
Californian Will Forte, 43, appeared for eight years on the American sketch 
showSaturday Night Live. "I never would have thought of him, but I liked his 
auditions," directorAlexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> has said of casting the 
comic actor inNebraska as David, Woody's straight-laced, somewhat dour son.

This role is a departure from your work on Saturday Night Live. Were you 
surprised when it was offered to you?

Very. I loved the script and really felt a connection to the character, but I 
never thought I'd get to do it. I taped myself doing four scenes, sent them to 
Alexander Payne, then didn't hear anything back for four months. Even after he 
called me in to read in person, I didn't think I'd get it, but a month later I 
was offered the part. That was the most exciting phone call.

In a recent New Yorker profile 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/10/28/131028fa_fact_talbot>, Payne 
said you had a "magnificent recognisability, like a buddy of yours in high 
school that you bump into in the mall". Is that something you recognise in 
yourself?

I'll take it as a compliment. I did connect with the character in an unusual 
way – who I am in real life is not far off who David is in this movie, the good 
and the bad of it.

In what way?

I'm pretty patient and forgiving, like David is. I can let people take 
advantage of me at times. I feel like I will give a lot of myself and don't 
need to receive much in return: that's probably the main thing. I try to be a 
good person – I don't always succeed, but that's what I'm shooting for.

David perseveres with his father, played by Bruce Dern, when everyone else 
seems to give up on him. Did you understand where he was coming from?

Yes. I'm an optimist and I'll stay in situations for much longer than I 
should, just thinking that they'll work themselves out. In a lot of ways, my 
grandfather was really similar to Bruce's character: he was a man of few words. 
He was wonderful and I loved him very much, but I understood that, with 
somebody who doesn't communicate a lot, you need to have patience.

Was it a challenge to play the straight man?

It was nerve-racking at first, but when I got down to it, it wasn't that 
different from what I'd done before. Bruce would say the most important thing 
is to just find the truth of the scene and be in the moment. At first that just 
sounded like a bunch of actor mumbo-jumbo, but after a while I realised exactly 
what he was saying and it was really helpful. And it was a huge thrill for me 
to play the straight man because I never get to play those kinds of roles.

Was playing opposite Bruce fun?

He's the best. He was a wonderful friend to me during the whole process – we 
were locked in a car together 12 hours a day for several weeks – and I got to 
see this legend deliver a performance of a lifetime. And between takes I got to 
hear stories from a man who's worked with so many incredible people. He would 
tell me all about Alfred Hitchcock and John Wayne and Elia Kazan. We got to be 
really close.

You started your career with the Los Angeles improv troupe the Groundlings 
<http://www.groundlings.com/media/videos.aspx> in the late 1990s. What were 
your ambitions back then?

To get on Saturday Night Live.

You worked there for eight years. What was the ratio of fun to stress?

It was an incredibly gruelling schedule. In the beginning the stress was major 
– I had pretty bad stage fright. It took several years before I was able to 
loosen up. Then it became more fun than stress. It was such a unique job and I 
loved it.

Did you have a favourite character?

Yes. I was a basketball coach trying to motivate his team and I play them this 
crazy Herb Alpert song, Casino Royale, then get really swept up in the emotion 
of it 
<http://www.marktastic.com/2009/02/will-forte-peyton-manning-dancing-on-snl/>
all and dance.

What's next?

Right before Nebraska, I went to Ireland to do this little movie called Run & 
Jump. It was so far away from home, I felt a real safety to explore a different 
kind of role. I loved how it turned out. I also didLife of Crime, an adaptation 
of an Elmore Leonard book. Then I got to work with Peter Bogdanovich on his new 
filmSquirrels to the Nuts, which was awesome. I still can't believe it. If 
you'd told me a year-and-a-half ago that I'd be working with Alexander Payne 
and Peter Bogdanovich in the next 18 months, I would have locked you up in an 
insane asylum.
 