



With China set to lead a new $50bn international financial institution, the 
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asian-infrastructure-investment-bank> 
(AIIB), most of the debate has centred on the US’s futile efforts to discourage 
other advanced economies from joining. Far too little attention has been 
devoted to understanding why multilateral development lending has so often 
failed, and what might be done to make it work better.


Multilateral development institutions have probably had their most consistent 
success when they serve as “knowledge” banks, helping to share experience, best 
practices, and technical knowledge across regions. By contrast, their greatest 
failures have come from funding grandiose projects that benefit the current 
elite, but do not properly balance environmental, social, and development 
priorities.

Dam construction is a leading historical example. In general, there is a 
tendency to overestimate the economic benefits of big infrastructure projects 
in countries riddled by poor governance and corruption, and to underestimate 
the long-run social costs of having to repay loans whether or not promised 
revenues materialise. Obviously, the AIIB runs this risk.

That said, there are huge infrastructure needs across developing Asia, and it 
is high time for China to play a greater role in international lending 
institutions. Moreover, the official US argument – that China should invest its 
money in existing institutions, such as the World Bank and the Asian 
Development Bank, because a Chinese-led bank would likely have governance 
problems – smacks of hypocrisy. Good governance? Is the US prepared to 
relinquish its historical prerogative to choose theWorld Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank> president?

Likewise, the US worries that China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
may use the AIIB to advance China’s economic and political interests. But 
anyone who is even vaguely familiar with the US approach to multilateral 
lending knows that no other country has been as adept at exploiting its power 
and leverage for strategic gain.

With China’s growing importance in the world order, it needs to be given space 
to forge its own approach to global economic leadership. Frankly, a relatively 
small infrastructure bank seems as good a place as any to start.

Besides, China is already pouring money into the developing world, often 
through highly opaque channels. To the extent that the AIIB normalises a 
portion of Chinese development assistance, and subjects it to scrutiny from the 
new bank’s advanced-country members, the new bank’s existence should be all for 
the better.

With its penchant for constant experimentation and improvement 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-economy-slower-growth-by-andrew-sheng-and-geng-xiao-2015-03>
, one might even hope that China will draw lessons and apply them to all of its 
developing-country lending. Who knows, maybe the existing development banks 
will learn something.

While the world should generally welcome China’s initiative, the real question 
is what kind of aid developing Asia needs. Anyone who has worked in developing 
countries understands that weak institutions and poor governance are often far 
bigger obstacles to growth than a lack of funds. And, however great a project 
looks on paper, practical implementation is often a sobering experience. Costs 
invariably far exceed initial estimates, and planners often woefully 
underestimate the skills and funding needed to ensure maintenance and repairs.

My interpretation of the World Bank’s record is that its role has been most 
consistently positive when it helps countries with “soft” development 
infrastructure: technical assistance and serving as a global knowledge bank. 
When its main role has been to provide financial muscle, the results have been 
less impressive. In China itself, for example, World Bank money has not been so 
important quantitatively, yet the Chinese generally credit the bank for having 
helpful blueprints and information.

Indeed, a strong case can be made that development aid would be more effective 
if it took the form of outright grants, rather than loans that ultimately need 
to be repaid. Headline aid numbers might seem less impressive, but long-run 
results would be better. Moreover, the world is awash in liquidity right now, 
and even where a government’s own money is inadequate, it is often possible to 
establish public-private partnerships to build genuinely high-return projects. 
Competent government is a far scarcer commodity than cash.

Unfortunately, it is far from clear that the Chinese model of infrastructure 
development can be exported universally. China’s strong central government 
overwhelms opposition from people displaced by new roads, bridges, and dams, 
and for many years ran roughshod over environmental concerns and workers’ 
rights. The parallels with the old Soviet Union are striking.

Some developing countries in Asia work differently. In democratic India, for 
example, it took eight years to rebuild Mumbai’s airport, because courts forced 
the government to respect the rights of squatters on its outskirts.

Given the legacy of problematic loans and projects funded by western-led 
infrastructure banks, it is reasonable to ask whether another one is needed, as 
opposed to reforming existing institutions. Still, if the AIIB views itself 
mainly as a knowledge bank, rather than a funding vehicle, it could provide 
real added value. We should evaluate the AIIB by how it chooses and fosters 
projects, not just by how much financing it provides.

Kenneth Rogoff, a former chief economist of the International Monetary Fund, 
is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard University. 


Copyright: Project Syndicate, 2015. <http://www.project-syndicate.org>

 