
There were British tears on Tuesday but, for a refreshing change, they were 
caused by joy and not despair. Elena Baltacha's 4-6, 6-4, 6-0 win over Karin 
Knapp of Italy took her into the second round atWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> for the sixth time in her career 
but it was the confirmation that she had received a wildcard into next month's 
Olympic Games which prompted the floods.

There was also double joy for the British No 1 Anne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong>, who beat Laura Pous-Tio of 
Spain 6-3, 6-3 and who also received a wildcard to the Games. James Ward's 
first win at Wimbledon, a 4-6, 6-0, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3 victory over the world No36 
Pablo Andújar was statistically superior and well deserved, ensuring that at 
least five Britons will be in round two, the best home performance since 2006. 
That will become six in the unlikely event that Jamie Baker beats Andy Roddick, 
who led 7-6, 4-2 when play was suspended.

But the sheer effort by Baltacha, whose dreams of playing at the Olympics have 
driven her on for several years, trumped everything. Thirty-two years ago, 
Baltacha's pentathlete mother, Olga, should have joined her father, the former 
Ipswich footballer Sergei, at the Moscow Olympics but had to stay at home to 
look after their daughter. On Tuesday Baltacha did not even know that she had 
received a wildcard until the watching Judy Murray, Britain's Fed Cup team 
captain, told her immediately after the match. "You're joking," Baltacha said, 
before bursting into tears and hugging her fellow Scot.

By the time Baltacha, who next plays the defending champion Petra Kvitova, 
arrived for her press conference, the tears had been replaced with a huge 
smile. "I'm glad no one told me before because I would have been all over the 
place," she said. "It was just amazing news. I was quite emotional anyway to 
have won that match. Then I went straight over to my team and Judy leant over 
and said: 'I've got another [piece of] really good news for you. You have been 
given a spot at the Olympics.' That was it. Tears were going everywhere. Same 
with Judy."

It was always likely that Keothavong, as the British No1, would receive one of 
the six wildcards available for the women's event at the Olympics, which will 
be played at Wimbledon. Baltacha had held the No1 ranking from the end of 2009 
only to be overtaken on the cut-off date for the Games. Though Judy Murray and 
the LTA had lobbied for a second wildcard, no one was convinced they would get 
it.

Keothavong was equally excited. "The news about the Olympics came through 
before I went on court," she said. "Just to have that confirmation, it's just 
something I've always dreamt about, you know, something I've worked hard 
towards."

Ward, who was overlooked for a wildcard into the men's event at the Olympics, 
trailed Andújar 3-0 in the final set before reeling off six straight games for 
the finest win of his career. Languishing at No173 in the rankings, money has 
been an issue for the Londoner and he said he had been forced to sell his 
season ticket for his beloved Arsenal. "It's a bit of a nightmare," he said, 
after securing at least £23,125 for reaching round two. "I probably can afford 
it now. I might try and speak to the guy and get them back."

The newest Brit, Johanna Konta, was edged out 10-8 in the final set by the 
American Christina McHale, the No28 seed. Level at 7-7 overnight, Konta held 
serve in the first game back before a short rain delay but McHale's greater 
experience saw her through.

Born in Sydney to Hungarian parents, the 21-year-old Konta has been in the UK 
since she was 15 and received citizenship just a couple of weeks ago. Confident 
and articulate, she was cheered throughout her match and made it clear where 
her loyalties lie. "I feel British and I am happy to finally have GBR next to 
my name," she said. "People who are in touch with tennis will have seen my name 
around for the last few years. I very much hope that I have been accepted now."

Watson and Robson received a wildcard into the doubles event at the Olympics, 
and Baltacha and Keothavong may yet join them if another pair drops out through 
injury. In the men's doubles, Murray and his brother Jamie will be joined by 
Britain's top-ranked pair, Colin Fleming and Ross Hutchins, both of whom 
received direct entry through their rankings.
 