
Swedish Lapland, in north Sweden, is a place of natural beauty, stunning 
sights and wild countryside. Home to the Sami, Europe’s northernmost indigenous 
people, Swedish Lapland experiences midnight sun during the summer months and 
offers a fantastic vantage point from which to view the aurora borealis 
(northern lights). Activities are excitement-packed throughout the year, with 
ice fishing, snow-shoeing, downhill and cross-country skiing, fishing, 
canoeing, climbing, Sami cultural experiences, dog sledding and reindeer rides 
all on offer.

One lucky reader will be heading out to sample Swedish Lapland for themselves: 
this fantastic competition is for a short break, including two nights at the 
Aurora Safari Camp on the Råne River.


An unforgettable glamping experience in the snow, within the Arctic Circle, 
Aurora Safari Camp guests sleep in traditional Nordic-designed Lavvu tents, 
which have comfy beds, armchairs and wood burners to keep guests snug. The camp 
is ideally located for enjoying the aurora borealis, with no artificial light 
to interfere with one of nature’s greatest spectacles. There’s a communal 
lounge tent where guests can eat and drink around an open fire and a small 
sauna to warm up winter evenings.


During their stay, the winner can try ice sculpting, with guidance from 
professional ice artists, and a snowshoe walk, where they will be guided 
through the silence of the winter forest wearing specially designed footwear. 
The prize also includes a magical dog-sledding experience with Isdimma Husky 
Adventures on a forest or lake trail from the Aurora Safari Camp.


The winner can then unwind for two nights at the boutique Lydmar Hotel in 
Stockholm. Calmness and simplicity are on offer here. Guests can enjoy relaxed 
elegance while being looked after by friendly staff with lots of local 
knowledge. The smart brasserie has an eclectic menu, bedrooms are chic (and 
many have waterfront views) and the lobby is used as an exhibition space for 
rising stars in art, design and photography. With a central Stockholm location, 
this stylish hotel is a great base for exploring the capital - and contrasts 
beautifully with the Swedish Lapland stay.


For your chance to win this amazing holiday from Original Travel 
<http://www.originaltravel.co.uk/>, simply fill out your details below.


Terms and conditions

1. The Original Travel Swedish Lapland prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open 
to residents of the UK aged 18 and over.


2. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM”), their group companies or family members or anyone else 
connected to the Prize Draw.


3. Entry into the Prize Draw is acceptance of these Terms and Conditions.


4. To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. If you have 
any questions about how to enter or in connection with the Prize Draw, please 
emailcompetitions.glabs@theguardian.com 
<mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> with “Original Travel Swedish 
Lapland prize draw” in the subject line.

5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us.


6. No responsibility is taken for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt.


7. The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 9 December 2015. Entries received after 
that date and time will not be considered.


8. The winner will be chosen from a random draw of entries.


9. One winner will receive a holiday to Swedish Lapland with Original Travel, 
including:

 * Two nights at the Lydmar, Stockholm in a Medium King including breakfast

 * Two nights at the Aurora Safari Camp full board including ice sculpting, 
snow-shoeing and dog sledding activities 
 * Return flights for two people in economy are included to the maximum value 
of £500 total 
 * Hotel transfers 
If the winner would like to extend their stay, invite extra people, upgrade 
their flights or change the itinerary this can be arranged but the difference 
in cost will have to be paid for. If flight costs exceed £500 this will need to 
be paid for by the winner. If flights cost less than £500 the difference in 
price will not be given in cash. Room nights and flights are subject to 
availability. Once flight tickets have been issued they are valid for flights 
and dates shown only. Lounge passes and upgrades are not permitted with these 
tickets. Passport, visas, health requirements and travel insurance are the 
responsibility of the ‘winner’. All spending money and other expenses 
(including all personal expenses, upgrades, meals outside of the package, 
in-room charges such as, mini bar consumption, telephone calls, laundry 
services etc.) as the case may be, unless specifically stated, are the sole 
responsibility of the prize winner. Prize winners are responsible for their own 
transport to and from the UK airports. The prize is valid for two adults 
travelling between 10 January 2016 and 30 April 2016 or 10 January 2017 and 30 
April 2017.

10. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize and 
not specifically included in the prize.

11. The winner/winners will be notified by phone or email after 16 February 
2016 and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not 
respond to GNM within 28 days of being notified by GNM, then the winner’s prize 
will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner (and that 
winner will have to respond to the phone call or email from GNM within 28 days 
or else they will also forfeit their prize). Flights and accommodation must be 
booked through Original Travel within 28 days of the prize being accepted.


12. Details of the winner/winners can be obtained by sending a stamped 
addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Creative, Guardian News & 
Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.


13. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prizes.


14. GNM retains the right to substitute the prize with another prize of 
similar value in the event the original prize offered is not available.


15. The winner may be required for promotional activity.


16. No purchase necessary.


17. Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence.


18. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw.


19. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding and no correspondence will be 
entered into.


20. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure.


21. The Prize Draw will be governed by English law.


22. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
 