
Stumbling across a well-thumbed copy of Angela Carter’s 1991 novel, Wise 
Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/dec/19/families-in-literature-the-chance-and-hazard-twins-in-wise-children-by-angela-carter>
, in a secondhand bookshop, I was heartened – and a little saddened – to notice 
that I was not alone in choosing this title as a book to share. For written 
inside this particular paperback was the following inscription:


18.5.93

Bridget,

You often have to travel far from the self in order to truly find yourself. 
Your journey to these alien lands is underway now. So go out there searching 
for the truth and returned enriched.

You have an immense amount of talent; don’t ever let anyone tell you otherwise,

Happy travelling,

Love Phil

Angela Carter: a portrait in postcards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/22/angela-carter-postcards-susannah-clapp>
One can’t help feeling for poor Phil. Do I detect romantic overtones? Or 
something more paternal? Perhaps a parting of the ways? (Certainly, at least, a 
parting of the ways for Bridget and this copy of Wise Children.) Whatever the 
true story behind Phil’s message to Bridget may be, I am not surprised that the 
novel inspired such an earnest and heartfelt inscription, because Wise Children 
– Carter’s last and greatest novel – is a book I have forced upon friends and 
family members over the years and never fail to recommend if asked. I return to 
it every year or so, always to find myself newly impressed by its brilliance. A 
fictionalised showbiz memoir charting the slings and arrows inflicted on two 
very different branches of a once-great theatrical dynasty in London (the 
legitimate Hazards and the illegitimate Chances), there is a passage early on 
which, for me, encapsulates the enduring appeal of this novel.

The scene is 49 Bard Road, Brixton, present day (presumably circa 1991). It is 
a house that, like our narrator, Dora Chance, and her twin sister, Nora, has 
seen better days. On this particular day the Chance sisters happen to be 
celebrating their 75th birthdays:

Seventy-five, today, and a topsy-turvy day of wind and sunshine. The kind of 
wind that gets into the blood and drives you wild. Wild!

And I give a little shiver because suddenly I know, I know it in my ancient 
water, that something will happen today. Something exciting. Something nice, 
something nasty, I don’t give a monkey’s. Just as long as something happens to 
remind us we’re still in the land of the living.

Rediscovering Angela Carter's poetry: Images that stick and splinter in the 
mind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/30/rediscovering-angela-carter-poetry>
What mainly happens is that Dora recounts her family history – one which 
contains all the juicy Shakespearean tropes of ambition, greed and revenge; 
fathers and daughters; brothers and sisters; twins, mistaken identity, incest 
and adultery. But beneath all this high melodrama, Wise Children is primarily a 
book about family and forgiveness; about love and loss; failure and success. 
Mostly, though, it is about life and living. In fact, with its irony-free 
leitmotif “What a joy it is to sing and dance!” I am hard-pressed to think of 
another book that is quite so life-affirming.

In Dora Chance, Angela Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter> 
bequeathed to us one of the most distinctive, original narrative voices in 
modern English literature. It is wise, bawdy, vulgar, eloquent and very, very 
funny. (Wise Children is one of the all-time great comic novels – up there with 
the likes of the George and Weedon Grossmiths’ Diary of a Nobody, Kingsley 
Amis’s Lucky Jim, and Martin Amis’s Money). And the writing is often 
breathtakingly lyrical, with passages of bravura that immediately send you back 
to their beginning just to make sure what you read really was just as good as 
first you thought:

“There was nothing so stuffy as the lives of small-time theatricals, in those 
days, and south London was a ghetto of chorus girls and boys and whatnot. In 
the semis, behind the dusty privet hedges, they rested between engagements, 
sitting on a piece of leatherette suite in the sitting room where the fumed oak 
sideboard contained a single bottle of sweet sherry and half a dozen dusty 
glasses stood on a tarnished silver tray inscribed, ‘To a great little trouper 
from the Merry Martins, Frinton-on-Sea, 1919,’ or something like that, beneath 
framed photographs of girls with big thighs in tights and men in crepe hair 
signed with Xs galore and framed colour reproductions on the walls of scenes 
depicting red-nosed monks eating big meals of venison and boar.

It is, of course, the saddest of ironies that such a life-affirming book was 
written as the author, unbeknownst to her, was dying of cancer. The book was 
published in 1991; Carter died in February 1992 at 51. And yet, such is the 
strength of the writing thatWise Children 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wise-children.html> transcends this sad fact, 
and the comedy is never overshadowed by the tragedy. It is a masterpiece. 
Please share.
 