
Solo Attempt

Newfoundland to Paris

Start Last Night

Miss Earhart (Mrs G. Palmer Putnam), a well-known American airwoman, started a 
solo flight across the Atlantic from Harbour Grace (Newfoundland) at 11.15 last 
night (B.S.T.). Her destination (says Reuter) is Paris. This is her second 
Atlantic air crossing. The first was made four years ago, when she accompanied 
Mr. Wilmer Stulz and Mr. Louis Gordon as a passenger in the seaplane 
Friendship, which was forced down off the coast of Carmarthenshire.

She will be the first woman to fly the Atlantic solo if the present venture is 
successful.

There was a south-westerly wind blowing when the flight began, and the weather 
was cloudy. The red-and-gold plane soared easily into the skies and rapidly 
disappeared eastwards along the same route that Miss Earhart travelled four 
years ago when she became the first woman to cross the Atlantic.

In the first stages of her present flight form New York she was accompanied by 
Mr. Bernt Balcheo, Rear Admiral Byrd's pilot, and Mr. Eddie Gorski, a mechanic. 
They set off for New York on Thursday and spent the night at St. John (New 
Brunswick), arriving at Harbour Grace at 7 p.m., B.S.T., yesterday.

Speed of 140 m.p.h.

Miss Earhart's Lockheed monoplane is stated to have a cruising speed of 140 
miles an hour and a radius of 3,200 miles, ample to take her to Paris under 
ordinary conditions. After landing in Le Bourget it is believed that she 
intends to proceed to Rome, where the first international congress of 
transatlantic flyers is being held towards the end of the month.

Miss Earhart has done considerable flying on her own, and in 1931 completed 
the first flight from the Atlantic to the Pacific and back in an autogiro. If 
she succeeds in her transatlantic flight she will have accomplished it on the 
fifth anniversary of Lindbergh's historic flight, which falls to-day. Married 
last year to Mr. George P. Putnam, she decided to retain her maiden name for 
official purposes. It is understood that her husband is financing her flight.
 