
Aster sits on the steps of the Zeway Health Centre in Ethiopia. Wiping tears 
from her eyes she recounts the story of her daughter's death, "My daughter was 
an excellent student, she deserved to live longer". Aster's daughter was not 
killed by famine or disease. She was the victim of a silent pandemic which 
kills 68,000 women each year. Fearful and ashamed, Aster's daughter was one of 
19 million women who each year are forced to seek abortions from untrained 
providers in unsanitary conditions. By the time Aster found out what had 
happened to her daughter, it was too late to save her life. Aster is one of 
four women who feature in Lisa Russell's short film, 'Not Yet Rain', made in 
association with leading reproductive health organisation, Ipas, which 
highlights the devastating effect that unsafe abortion can have on women's 
lives.

Abortion was made legal in Ethiopia in 2006 and although it has come too late 
to save the life of Aster's daughter it has given hope to women in a country 
which has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in all of sub-Saharan 
Africa. When carried out by qualified practitioners in an appropriate clinical 
setting abortion is one of the safest medical procedures, yet deaths from 
abortion count for 13% of maternal deaths worldwide. Nearly all occur in the 
developing world, where the rate of death from abortion is hundreds of times 
higher than that of the UK. The situation has been described by Fred Sai, 
Special Adviser to the President of Ghana, as a straightforward public health 
problem that has been allowed to become 'the killing fields of women in 
developing countries, especially Africa'.

Worldwide, half a million women die each year as a result of complications 
from pregnancy and childbirth, including unsafe abortion. Global commitment to 
addressing this mortality rate is crucial to the achievement of the fifth 
Millennium Development Goal, which aims to reduce the number of these deaths by 
three quarters by 2015. Central to this is ensuring that all women have access 
to contraception to avoid unintended pregnancies.

Research by the United Nations Population Fund found that in sub-Saharan 
Africa, almost half of women were using no method of family planning. Often 
family planning services do not exist or they are inaccessible. In many 
relationships women have no control over contraceptive use.

In Ethiopia, almost 60 percent of women have been subjected to sexual 
violence, including marital rape. These are women like Tigist, who works in a 
tea shop in Shashemane, Ethiopia. Tigist, who also features in 'Not Yet Rain', 
became pregnant after she was raped by a man whose marriage proposal she had 
refused. With no family or support around her, Tigist felt she could not raise 
a child. Ethiopia's abortion law reforms meant that Tigist had a choice and was 
able to access a safe abortion in a public hospital. But whilst reproductive 
rights campaigners commend Ethiopia's progressive reforms, they are becoming 
increasingly concerned by a converse policy shift in some Latin American 
countries, where the Catholic Church maintains a powerful influence.

In the run up to the 2006 Nicaraguan presidential election, the Catholic 
Church introduced legislation to abolish a law that permitted therapeutic 
abortion to preserve a mother's health. In an attempt to secure much needed 
support from the Catholic Church the reform was immediately supported by the 
leaders of both dominant parties in the electoral race. Whilst abortion 
campaigners were not surprised by the introduction of the legislation in a 
country that is predominantly Catholic, they were shocked that one of its most 
vociferous supporters was Daniel Ortega - leader of the Sandinista National 
Liberation Front (FSLN) party, who won the election. As President of Nicaragua 
during the 1980s, Ortega had openly supported abortion, before re-embracing 
Catholicism and becoming a strict opponent of it.

Despite opposition from international organisations including the United 
Nations, Nicaragua now imposes a blanket ban on all abortion. Providing or 
seeking an abortion, even when a woman's life is endangered, is punishable by 
up to three years imprisonment. Women now have no choice but to seek backstreet 
abortions, often from untrained providers in unhygienic conditions, or attempt 
to induce abortion themselves. Common methods include drinking bleach or 
turpentine or abdominal massage which can rupture the uterus. One doctor in a 
Nicaraguan hospital tells of watching a woman in her care die, because nobody 
was prepared to perform the abortion she so obviously needed, "the woman was 
here two days without treatment until she expulsed the foetus on her own. And 
by then she was already in septic shock and died five days later." The case is 
featured in a report by Human Rights Watch, which calls for a removal of the 
legal restrictions to abortion in Nicaragua which are costing women their lives.

Whilst legalising abortion decreases the rate of abortion related deaths, it 
does not eliminate them completely. In many developing countries stigma still 
surrounds unsafe abortion in a shroud of secrecy, intensifying the silence of 
the pandemic. But leading reproductive health organisations worldwide are 
hopeful that the silence is being broken, not least because the 'global gag' 
has been removed from the mouth of US abortion funding. The term refers to the 
Mexico City Policy, first introduced by President Reagan and later reintroduced 
by President Bush, which forbids US funds to be donated to foreign family 
planning organisations that provide abortion or campaign for it to be made 
legal. In his first week of office, President Barack Obama rescinded the policy 
as a testament to his commitment "to protecting a woman's right to choose".

For a women like Tigist, having the choice to access a safe abortion saved her 
life. As she says at the end of 'Not Yet Rain', "What we want is to be careful 
for ourselves, and just live".

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 