
Nearly 1.5m people work in transport and logistics in the UK. But less than a 
quarter of these employees are female, according to the UK Commission for 
Employment and Skills (UKCES).

The logistics industry also suffers from poor perceptions of its career 
opportunities, which has led to a debate around skills gaps and a lack of 
gender diversity.

Addressing perceptions that the logistics industry is a career option for a 
very specific type of person is a real challenge – it's hard to escape the 
impression that roles primarily involve moving and lifting. What's more, the 
industry's position within the manufacturing sector has, for some, meant that 
the legacy workforce is more male dominated.

As a woman working in the sector, a few of my experiences have highlighted 
this: health and safety gear being produced in large sizes; I've felt that 
having shorter hair would make for easier compliance; and I've had to manage 
plenty of quick changes out of tights and into socks and steel-toed boots. 
These are small things, but considerations that sometimes make wardrobe 
decisions longer in the morning. I won't opt to wear a skirt or dress on the 
days I know I'm in the warehouse.

When I first started in logistics, I was more conscious of being female than I 
am now. I once noticed at an internal meeting that, aside from the HR rep, I 
was the only female present. I wondered at the time if this was likely to be a 
regular occurrence. But as the competitive landscape changes, delivering for a 
customer is fast becoming the single most important measure of success.

Logistics permeates every industry and business sector in the world – retail, 
life sciences, fashion, technology, construction, transport and so on. This 
means that in addition to needing drivers and warehouse operatives, there's 
also a requirement for business development and customer-facing personnel with 
expertise in the industries in which customers operate.

I manage a diverse team of professionals in operations, customer services, 
finance and even industry experts. My typical day is full of meetings with 
customers, my team or the company as a whole to ensure we're moving in the 
right direction.

The logistics industry is working to make changes to attract a more diverse 
workforce but, in doing so, it's important that there is a focus on hiring 
women in positions where they have visibility to inspire and encourage other 
women into the industry.

For me, being a woman in the logistics industry isn't an issue. I have always 
believed that I'm in a role to do a job, and to get the job done you need 
variety in the skills and expertise of the team. I can see why the industry may 
seem daunting to some, but it's important to understand that current 
perceptions of the industry aren't always accurate.

Those considering the move into logistics should focus on building their own 
brand – it's the best way to ensure you're accepted in the role for your 
abilities. I've been guilty of looking at a role of thinking "what can't I do?" 
but it's important to focus on what you can bring to your role that's currently 
missing.

We should relish diversity. The industry will only be able to attract the 
right talent and overcome its perception issues by better promoting the scope 
of opportunities available.

Melanie Hall is the vice president of life sciences at DHL Supply Chain 
<http://www.dhl.co.uk/en/logistics/supply_chain_solutions.html>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 