
Women – including those who work in senior positions for some of the country's 
leading firms – are held back from reaching the very highest levels in business 
because of the difficulties they find in striking the right tone of language 
during high pressure meetings.

The claim is made by linguistics expert Dr Judith Baxter, who undertook an 
18-month study into the speaking patterns of men and women at meetings in seven 
major well-known companies, including two in the FTSE-100.

The research found that women were four times more likely than men to be 
self-deprecating, use humour and speak indirectly or apologetically when 
broaching difficult subjects with board members in order to avoid conflict. And 
it doesn't always work.

Baxter said such language, which the study describes as "double voice 
discourse" (DvD), was used because women were often heavily outnumbered on 
boards. As a result, senior women engage in a kind of linguistic second 
guessing, adjusting their language to make the right impact on colleagues. 
Examples included beginning comments with phrases such as "I am probably 
speaking out of turn, but…" and "Sorry to cut across you like that but…"

When employed effectively, this kind of language could be a useful tool to 
manipulate those around them, she claimed, but self-deprecation and an 
apologetic style were risky because striking a wrong note could lead to 
appearing defensive and weak.

Baxter, a lecturer in applied linguistics at Aston University, said women were 
left open to accusations that they were not fully in control of their 
arguments, which could lead to a complete loss of authority during meetings. 
"They have to work really hard to hit the right note with their colleagues", 
she said. "I have seen a woman use all the wrong linguistic strategies, and she 
lost the room".

Baxter said she had heard one woman director, who had spoken just twice in a 
meeting, say: "Sorry, sorry, I'm talking too much, I'm talking too much."

According to the annual Female FTSE Board report from Cranfield University 
School of Management <http://www.som.cranfield.ac.uk/som/ftse>, the proportion 
of women on the boards of FTSE-100 companies is only 12.5%, a marginal rise on 
the previous year.

Baxter said: "I found very few differences between men and female leadership 
language, but there was this one key difference, which I call double-voice 
discourse. Women use this when they are facing criticism or when handling 
conflict. While men tend to direct and straight talking and if they are 
confrontational it is regarded as nothing personal, women avoid being directly 
confrontational and use a range of strategies to preserve a range of alliances, 
if not friendships, to achieve their agenda.

"I am not saying that women are more sharing and caring than men. I am not 
saying they are more altruistic. They are doing it to achieve their own agenda."

But Baxter added that the difficulty in mastering such language not only made 
it difficult for women to progress, but may put a lot of women off aiming for 
the top positions.

Baxter said women appeared to use DvD only when greatly outnumbered by men. 
Karren Brady, West Ham United FC's vice chair and star of BBC showThe Apprentice
, did not need to use the linguistic tricks, she had noticed.

But Helena Morrissey, 44, recently named one of the most influential woman in 
the City, who oversees investments worth £47bn as well as her family of nine 
children, said she recognised Baxter's findings from her own experiences. "It 
is hard to generalise because there is a spectrum, but actually the women I 
have worked with over the years certainly don't seek confrontation and would 
tend to try to avoid it, which would be consistent with this pre-empting of 
criticism and anxiety, I suppose; hedging, using humour to soften things.

"There are some men who enjoy a good fight, enjoy confrontation, but I don't 
think I have met any women who want to spark an argument, while I have seen men 
in the context of mainly male-orientated boardrooms or senior discussion almost 
seem to push somebody to have that discussion in a quite confrontational way. 
It is not only that women speak differently, but they are also trying to avoid 
what will happen next, and this is their style to get there."

Morrissey, the chief executive of money management firm Newton, said she did 
not want women to start acting like men, but they should be conscious of their 
language.

"It may be seen as a bit of weakness on the part of women, because you are not 
playing the game in the same way. Maybe subconsciously there is a feeling that 
this person isn't as decisive, can't hold her own, is unsure of her arguments," 
she said.

"Don't say 'you aren't going to like this'; just say it and know that is not 
making yourself be like the man. You will get your point across and no one is 
going to think badly [of you]. Well they might, but that is all part of the 
discussion and the hammer and tongues."
 