
Another year, another Woody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>
 film. Whatever Works is his 39th full-length feature. The 40th (You Will Meet 
a Tall Dark Stranger) was screened at Cannes, and he's already preparing his 
41st. In France, where the Woodster is still worshipped as a god, you can 
practically set your watch by the annual Allen release. Distributors in the UK, 
however, are no longer as eager to snap up his offerings as they used to be. 
Despite an occasional "return to form" such as Vicky Cristina Barcelona, the 
quality of his work has plummeted since the early 1990s.

Of course, this fall-off could be because all but a very few film directors 
have shelf lives, and Allen, like Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese, may 
well have come to the end of his. On the other hand, his decline dates pretty 
obviously from the bust-up with Mia Farrow in 1992. Allen has always worked 
closely with the women in his life: Louise Lasser, his second wife, in the 
second half of the 1960s, Diane Keaton in the 1970s and Farrow in the 1980s. 
Could it be that his current wife, Soon-Yi Previn, just isn't cutting it as a 
muse?

Unlike her predecessors, of course, she isn't an actor, so can hardly be 
expected to have a public influence on her husband's output, unless the 
recurring age discrepancy between his leading men and women (there's a 40-year 
gap between Larry David and Evan Rachel Wood in Whatever Works) is a reflection 
of the 35-year gap between the film-maker and his wife.

But what I do know is that in the 1970s and 1980s, Allen's films featured some 
of the funniest, most complicated and fully rounded women's roles in modern 
cinema.Annie Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> may have been a 
flake, but she was a magnificent, multi-faceted flake. One can't imagine the 
role being played by anyone but Keaton. Farrow was feted for Rosemary's Baby 
and little else, until she blossomed as part of Allen's repertory cast in the 
astonishing decade-long run that included Broadway Danny Rose, The Purple Rose 
of Cairo and Hannah and Her Sisters.

The decline in Allen's oeuvre also coincides with a marked deterioration in 
the depth of his female characters. Since 1994, they have largely been a parade 
of dumb broads, grasping airheads and vulgar social climbers, who owe whatever 
scant charm they may have to the personalities of the actors playing them, but 
none whatsoever to the writing, which is frequently cruel. Frenchy (Tracey 
Ullman) in Small Time Crooks is a former showgirl whose ignorance and crass 
attempts to better herself provide the film with much of its humour, but also 
saddle it with a sour and misogynistic tone. Match Point's Nola Rice (Scarlett 
Johansson) morphs from cartoon femme fatale into needy pain-in-the-neck. The 
women in Cassandra's Dream go shopping.

It's as if Allen's attitude to women has soured. Or maybe he has simply 
lost interest in his female characters as people, so they're little more than 
decorative pawns. This is also the case with most Hollywood movies today, 
but compare these crude caricatures to Keaton in Annie Hall, or Mariel 
Hemingway in Manhattan, or Barbara Hershey and Dianne Wiest in Hannah and Her 
Sisters, or Judy Davis in Husbands and Wives, and you begin to get an idea of 
what we, along with Allen, have lost.
 