
Is this a football match or a Devo concert?' a bemused television technician 
asked on his way to work at the Cairo Military Stadium on Wednesday evening, 
where two of this summer's World Cup finalists featured in an African Nations 
Cup double-header that was beamed around the world. 'I don't know,' said his 
colleague. 'I think they look more like colour versions of the spermatazoa in 
that Woody Allen film.'

For those who do not recall the dress code for fans of the early-1980s 
post-punk band, or who did not see Everything You Always Wanted to Know About 
Sex, but Were Afraid to Ask, just think young men in brightly coloured 
jumpsuits: red, orange, yellow, green, dark blue, light blue. Lots of them. A 
convoy of 32 battered army trucks disgorged 600 or so in the stadium car park, 
and another 3,000 marched in from the military academy next door. They were 
there - and have been in lesser numbers at other matches in Cairo, Port Said 
and Alexandria - to put bums on unsold seats and add a welcome touch of colour 
and atmosphere.

They will be back in the same stadium tonight for a surreal occasion: Angola v 
Togo, both heading for the World Cup for the first time later this year, 
playing off to avoid bottom place in Group B of the Nations Cup. Togo are 
already out and the chances are that Angola will join them. There will be many 
more soldiers than paying spectators, though Angola do have 450 noisy fans 
here, including a very impressive brass section, and Togo, much better on 
percussion, can muster a couple of hundred. The next manager of England, if 
that is what the Portugal coach Luiz Felipe Scolari is to be, will be in the 
crowd, too, wondering how on earth these two got to the World Cup.

Angola take on Portugal, their formercolonial rulers, in their opening game in 
Cologne on Sunday 11 June. One need look no further than the goalkeeper to 
judge how difficult Angola's task will be, despite their having seen off 
Nigeria in qualifying. Joao Ricardo Ferreira, known simply as Ricardo, is 36 
and unemployed. He trains with a third-division club, Portomosense near his 
home in Leiria, and is desperate for a contract - anywhere. Ricardo is one of 
five Portuguese players who have been called up since 1996 when Angola started 
trawling for Portuguese players who had been born in Angola during 
pre-independence days. All of them play in the lower divisions, and Ricardo is 
amazed that he was asked to play on, given that he said 'No' back in 1998 when 
he didn't fancy three weeks at the Nations Cup in Burkina Faso.

The Angola manager, Luis Oliveira Goncalves, is another unlikely hero. His 
playing career never took him higher than the Angolan second division, but he 
has worked wonders coaching Angola's under-15s, under-17s, under-20s and now 
the senior team. His shiny grey jacket and expensive silk tie give him a touch 
of class that is matched here only by Cameroon manager Artur Jorge's moustache 
- and he is a realist. 'We are not going to win the World Cup,' he says. 'We 
have had decades of civil war. It is a wonderful achievement just to be there.'

The day before the game, at poolside at Togo's swanky hotel out near the 
pyramids, their manager, Stephen Keshi, had initially been reluctant to agree 
to a lengthy interview. When it was pointed out that both he and Goncalves had 
the chance to become the first black African to coach a team to a victory, any 
victory, at the World Cup finals, his mood brightened. 'Is that right?' he 
said, smiling and, suddenly, back-slapping. 'You want victories? I'll give you 
victories, don't worry about that!' Two days later he was not sure he would 
still be going to the World Cup. 'It's in the hands of the federation,' he said 
in response to rumours that defeats here against DR Congo and Cameroon would 
lead to his sacking.

Keshi, a Nigerian, has already had a major fall-out with Togo's star player, 
the new Arsenal striker Emmanuel Adebayor, and needs a win today to settle the 
nerves of his bosses. He has not lost the support of his players in the row 
with 'cry-baby' Adebayor, though. Imagine David Beckham saying this about Wayne 
Rooney: 'Everybody's really pissed off with him. He's let his team-mates down, 
let his country down. We don't need him. He should just go. He turned up after 
we hadn't seen him for three weeks. He missed all the preparation we did in 
Tunisia, didn't play in our friendly with Guinea and no one knew where he was 
or what he was up to. He makes it up as he goes along. He should be in cinema. 
He thinks he can do what he wants, get away with what he wants just because his 
name is Adebayor.'

Those are the views of the Togo captain, Jean-Paul Abal, who has gone to 
Arsenal for a price rumoured to be between £5m and £7m. Hats off for speaking 
it as it is.

But in their opening game, without Adebayor, Togo looked hopeless. Against 
Cameroon, with Adebayor leading the front line, they were much better. He 
looked awesome.

Not as awesome, though, as Samuel Eto'o, who scored a sensational goal - his 
fourth in two games - and laid on the second. There was a buzz around the 
stadium every time he had the ball, and when he fired in that goal, even the 
spermatazoa leapt to their feet. Never before, in nearly 50 years of the 
Nations Cup, has the tournament been graced by a truly world-class player. 
Eto'o is, on current form for Barcelona and here, the best non-Brazilian 
striker in the world.

But he won't be going to the World Cup, and an unemployed Portuguese 
goalkeeper will.
 