
He may have written, directed and starred in several films that others 
consider to be comic masterpieces, butWoody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> believes none of them will stand 
the test of time, according to a new documentary.

Referring to his four-decade career, Allen – whose latest film, Midnight in 
Paris, is unveiled at the Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> – admitted that endurance 
was "an achievement of sorts, but not the one that I care about".

"It's a secondary achievement," said the director of Annie Hall. "But to make 
a fine film, that's a different story. That has eluded me over the decades."

The documentary has been made by Oscar-nominated film-maker Robert Weide, 
whose earlier subjects have included the Marx Brothers. It took more than 20 
years to persuade Allen to agree, but in the end he was given unprecedented 
access over 18 months.

"Woody's harshest critic is himself," Weide said. "He's the one who says he's 
never made a great film. I said: 'What about …Annie Hall, Manhattan, Hannah and 
Her Sisters or Crimes and Misdemeanors?' He said: 'Those films came out OK, but 
they're not great films; they won't stand the test of time like [Vittorio De 
Sica's]Bicycle Thieves or [Jean Renoir's] La Grande Illusion.' He's always 
grading on that sort of scale."

That self-criticism is made clear in the documentary, which Weide expects to 
be screened on both sides of the Atlantic later this year. Speaking ofManhattan
, an enduring classic loved by legions of fans, Allen said he was so 
disappointed by the result that he begged the studio to ditch it. "I didn't 
like the film at all … I spoke to United Artists at the time and offered to 
make a film for them for nothing if they would not put it out," he said.

Allen, 75, exudes the self-deprecating humour in the documentary that 
audiences adore in his screen characters. "I've contributed my share of 
mediocre and very bad films, just like everybody else," he told Weide. "I've 
been working on the quantity theory. I feel if I keep making films, every once 
in a while I'll get lucky and one will come out OK. And that's exactly what 
happens."

Weide said he was astonished to be allowed to film Allen at work, as the set 
has always been off limits until now. "The accepted wisdom about Woody is that 
he is a minimalist director … [But] Woody's thing is always that if an actor 
wants direction from him, he'll give it. As he said to me, 'if they ask me a 
question, I'm not going to stare at them until they walk away. I'll respond'," 
he said.

Allen also allowed himself to be filmed at home, lying on his bed, writing a 
draft script in longhand before typing it out on the manual typewriter he has 
used for all his work since he was a teenager.
 