
Woody Harrelson is in talks to star opposite Laura Dern 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/woody-harrelsons-comic-adaptation-wilson-798087>
 as a middle-aged misanthrope desperate for one last chance of family life in 
the grimy drama Wilson, based on the acclaimed graphic novel by Ghost World’s 
Daniel Clowes.

Harrelson plays the Californian divorcee of the title, as he sets out to 
persuade his scarred, drug-abusing ex-wife (Dern) to rekindle their 
relationship after he discovers the existence of a teenage daughter. Wilson is 
also struggling to cope with the death of his father, a plot inspired by 
Clowes’ own experience.

Skeleton Twins’ director Craig Johnson will direct the film, which will be 
based on Clowes’ own screenplay. The doyen of the American independent comics 
scene also adapted his own graphic novel work for the big-screen version of 
Ghost World, starring Thora Birch, Scarlett Johansson and Steve Buscemi, in 
2001.

Both Wilson leads are on career highs: Harrelson after his critically 
acclaimed turn as a Louisiana homicide investigator in the HBO crime drama True 
Detective, and Dern after scoring a best supporting actress Oscar nomination 
for her turn in Jean-Marc Vallée’s acclaimed drama Wild.

Shia LaBeouf apologises for short film that copied Daniel Clowes story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/17/shia-labeouf-film-daniel-clowes-howard-cantour>
Nebraska and Sideways’ Alexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> was previously attached to 
direct Wilson, but is now on board as a producer. Payne’s first film, Citizen 
Ruth, starred Dern as a recovering drug addict. Johnson is looking to shoot in 
Minneapolis in June, according to the Hollywood Reporter.

Clowes was embroiled in controversy two years ago, after accusing actor Shia 
LaBeouf of using his work uncredited for the Transformers star’s short film 
Howard Cantour.com. LaBeouf was forced to issue an abject apology in December 
2013 after it emerged he had included dialogue from Clowes’ story Justin M 
Damiano, a study of a world-weary and disillusioned film critic, in his project.
 