
Ansel Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams> at 100/ 
William Eggleston Hayward Gallery, London SE1, to 22 September

Nightfall in the New Mexico desert. A passing photographer notices a strange 
face in the moon and an even stranger conjunction of darkness and light 
striking the horizon behind an abandoned graveyard. He leaps from his car and 
shoots a reel. There is no time to check the apertures. It is 1941 and Ansel 
Adams has caught one of the great split-second images of the century without 
the benefit of a high-speed shutter.

'Moonrise at Hernandez' is Adams's most famous picture, better loved than any 
of his other classics: the eerie sandstone pinnacles of Arizona, the ancient 
marvels of Yosemite; even dawn and dusk at the Grand Canyon. In fact, it has 
become the most lucrative photograph ever taken: sold and resold at fine art 
auctions, blown up into zillions of posters. Which is how two generations have 
mainly come to know it - the moon standing guard over the dead kings of the 
wild frontier: an American legend printed up as an epic.

Visit the Hayward Gallery's centenary exhibition, however, and you see it as 
it ought to be seen - an image so small the graves are barely discernible, a 
compressed study in visible darkness. Adams's work would later become more 
declamatory, larger, brighter, a form of public speech heeded by patriots and 
conservationists alike. But in the Thirties and Forties, the great early years, 
and the subject of this beautifully selected show, he was a lone pioneer, 
quietly amazed in the wilderness.

And equally amazed by the near and the far, the miniature and the vast - there 
is no sliding scale of priorities in these pictures. The colossal baked pyramid 
of Mount Wynne and the smallest constellation of forget-me-nots are both framed 
in a modest 5x7. A few bright fronds in a pool look like vapour trails 
criss-crossing a high sky. A whole cliff can seem as minutely detailed as an 
agate. Without any index of size, everything seems wondrous to the eye and it 
is staggering to come across a photograph of Adams himself, halfway up the High 
Sierra, dwarfed by the snow-capped mountains.

Nothing seems familiar any more in his art. White flowers form an embroidered 
shawl flung across a bank - or is it a frothing cascade? The rocks of Death 
Valley are as wrinkled and flat as elephant hide, or as boxy as brown paper 
parcels. You have to look twice at the saucer shaped stone rising out of the 
limpid lake to see that it is not a floating UFO. In these photographs liquid 
turns to air, stone to silver and the heaviest mass becomes weightless.

How are they made, these astonishingly radiant landscapes, where the aspens 
glow white, the cliffs turn to parchment and the skies deepen into biblical 
darkness? Adams was a supreme technician, a master of the fleeting moonrise and 
the measureless diorama. He could press two dozen tones of grey from a 
negative. But he was also a Romantic, and none of his images are simply records 
of the here and now, so much as emotional equivalents recollected - or 
recreated - in the tranquility of the darkroom.

It is well known, for example, that he used red filters to turn those skies to 
blackened thunder, a climax appropriate to the natural drama he felt he had 
witnessed. Half-tones were erased to create the effect of Japanese 
watercolours: black branches, say, lightly painted with snow. His palette runs 
to the full gold-and-sepia glimmer of a Samuel Palmer painting. And if this 
monochrome universe feels too highly coloured, too powerfully designed, too 
silent and deserted, then this is consistent with the selective art of memory. 
Like Wordsworth, Adams experienced over and again the epiphany of rocks and 
stones and trees in bright air. Unlike Wordsworth, he believed that 'there are 
no words to convey the moods of those moments' - only the condensed sonnet of a 
photo.

It feels like quite a plunge to go from Adams's eternal semi-heaven above down 
to William Eggleston's temporal world in the lower galleries at the Hayward. 
For one thing, the question is no longer how - but why, what and who? Who is 
this old-timer sitting on his bed with a gun? What does Brown's Custom Shop in 
Memphis actually sell? Why is this bar, according to the battered sign, always 
closed for business on Tuesdays?

Eggleston has been drifting through America for several decades now, seemingly 
shooting everything he sees - roadside graves, discarded suitcases, broken 
fenders, low-lit motels, shivering kids, lolloping dogs and sullen belles. 
Everything is equal to him, too, but in a different way from Adams. No thing or 
person is more or less significant than any other. His photographs never strive 
to draw attention to their subjects.

This made Eggleston as controversial, once, as his brash use of colour - the 
synthetic glow of the dye-transfer print. He would seem to be telling you 
everything and nothing at all, setting up a detailed scenario - a black man in 
his coffin, an over-dressed girl nervously gripping a cocktail - and then 
deflect all interpretation of the half-implied narrative. The more you look, 
the more the black man in his white coffin, with his black suit and white 
shirt, black tie and white gloves, becomes an array of dynamic rhythms - an 
exercise in graphic abstraction.

For Eggleston is a photographic formalist, no matter that he teases with 
anecdote. What he sees - properly composed - is enough, which is why his recent 
photographs of Kyoto tell you nothing about Japanese life. Even his colour 
asserts only itself. The California sky can look toxic or benign, depending on 
his technique. One half of a Thanksgiving dinner looks horrifyingly irradiated, 
yet the cornbread remains golden and delicious.

Eggleston has many imitators, but none have quite matched his particular feat, 
which is to go where no camera has apparently ever been. He peers beneath the 
bed and discovers a lost kingdom of shoes and coins. He opens the freezer and 
excavates an ice age of buried relics. Most startling of all, he prostrates 
himself beneath the tyres of a child's tricycle, abandoned on the sidewalk 
outside a suburban home. The tricycle rears up, a vast vehicle that dwarfs the 
family house, the family car and all: suddenly powerful, and not just to its 
diminutive owner.

 THREE TO SEE


 CHRIS OFILI Victoria Miro Gallery (to 3 Aug) Miraculous monkeys and visions 
of an African Eden: best show yet from this Turner Prize-winning painter.

 EARLY ONE MORNING Whitechapel, London E1 (to 8 Sept) Survey of a new 
generation of young sculptors, including Jim Lambie and Claire Barclay: pop, 
plastic, found objects, acid colours.

 STEFAN GEC Yorkshire Sculpture Park (to 28 July) Young British artist who 
works with video, photography and computer animation. Show focuses on the local 
Emley Moor Transmission Mast, 330 metres of tall concrete.
 