
During a recent presentation, I was given a raucous round of applause from the 
academics in the room for correctly describing our project’s study as a 
“pair-matched, repeated cross-sectional, two-armed, single-blinded, cluster 
randomised controlled trial”.

Academics are often accused of hiding in “ivory towers” as described in a 
recentGuardian newspaper article <http://ow.ly/SVm2z> that demanded they get 
better at sharing their ideas with a wider audience. But as practitioners, 
“policy influencing” and “research uptake” are increasingly becoming key 
components of our work, and it is essential that we also strive to bridge the 
divide and find ways to collaborate better with our academic colleagues.

As a development practitioner, gettting to the point where I can not only say 
the words “pair-matched, repeated cross-section, two-armed, single-blinded, 
cluster randomised controlled trial” but can also just about understand what 
they mean, has taken a year of working closely with academics from the
University of Minnesota <https://twin-cities.umn.edu/> and George Mason 
University <https://www2.gmu.edu/> on the study design for the Change Starts at 
Home project, a media and outreach project supported by DfID through theWhat 
Works to Prevent Violence Against Women <http://www.whatworks.co.za/> 
innovation fund.

A year of collaboration

Reflecting on experiences of working on this research project, I’ve put 
together a list of tips based on how the Change Starts at Home team (made up of 
three academics and two practitioners, based in five cities across three 
countries) has reached the point where we work effectively together and 
understand each other – (almost) all of the time.

 * Research each other and choose a good match
This is a relationship that needs to last a long time and be put to the test 
repeatedly. It will only work if you understand the scope of each other’s work 
and your respective methods. 
 * Work collaboratively on the project proposal and budget 
This way, neither the research nor the intervention will be an add-on – both 
will be thought through together from the start. As a practitioner, it is 
difficult to comprehend how much something like a randomised controlled trial 
will cost and what is involved, so you need to be prepared for that from the 
start. Equally, as an academic it is important to understand the limit of the 
budget and the scope of the implementation, and plan how to work with that from 
the very beginning. 
 * Meet in person early on 
You need to strike up a connection that will hold you together through the 
arguments that will undoubtedly occur as you try to work within the constraints 
of a project. Our team was lucky enough to spend five days together very early 
on, and this time was crucial in understanding not only how differently we see 
things but how much we need each other. 
 * Speak weekly 
This can sometimes feel arduous given all the pressures of delivery, but it is 
essential. There will be many tiny details that can only be worked out through 
speaking and continuously reinforcing the feeling that you are all on the same 
team. 
 * Remember the mutual benefits 
While academics and practitioners are not natural partners, there is so much 
we can learn from each other. Just like a symbiotic relationship between two 
dissimilar organisms, the relationship is necessary and mutually beneficial. 
Research means a lot more with practical application, and the practical 
application can have a greater impact if it is backed up by research. 
 * If you are implementing in the field, find academics who’ve done field 
studies in the past 
The gap between both sides will narrow if you both understand the realities of 
working in an environment that cannot be totally controlled. This is 
particularly true in settings impacted by humanitarian crises; it helps 
immensely to have academics with experience in conducting research within 
unstable settings. 
 * Practitioners, be prepared to answer lots of questions 
Academics want to know all the information, down to the minutiae. Sometimes it 
can feel intrusive or unnecessary – but it is not about lack of trust from 
their side, it is about making sure that the research piece is being conducted 
in an ethical manner. If the practitioner mirrors this approach, it will result 
in him/her really thinking through every element of the intervention and, 
ultimately, making it stronger. Putting everything down ahead of time does not 
mean that it all has to roll out at exactly the same time. Staggered rollouts 
are typical and much less daunting than heading down unfamiliar roads all at 
the same time. 
 * Academics, be prepared to make decisions
While the process of questioning can be useful and debate is important, 
agreement by consensus is not always the best way if it involves too much 
laboured deliberation. In the end what is often needed is a clear and simple 
decision taken by a respected professional to allow the process and the 
discussions to move on. 
 * Understand that you will need to produce different types of deliverables 
For academics, having study findings published in peer-reviewed, academic 
journals is an important output. This is their professional currency, but the 
process is lengthy and findings are often required to be embargoed until 
publication. For practitioners, rapid dissemination of findings in easily 
digestible briefs is often what’s most critical to influence programmes and 
policy. It is important to work on timelines together, and to look for ways to 
incorporate both of these priorities. For instance, while the findings are 
pending publication, consider how they can be disseminated verbally via 
presentations and/or disseminating brief reports to key stakeholders. 
One step at a time

Ultimately, practitioners and academics working together is much like people 
from very different countries trying to find common ground. I was applauded for 
correctly using the terms “pair-matched, repeated cross-sectional, two-armed, 
single-blinded, cluster randomised controlled trial” because I made the effort 
to learn a few words of a new language. So even if you are not fluent, even if 
you mispronounce a word or use a method out of context, the native speakers 
will just appreciate that you have tried. That is a good place to start, and 
who knows where it could lead?

Gemma Ferguson works for Equal Access <http://www.equalaccess.org> and is 
technical adviser for theChange Starts at Home 
<https://twitter.com/changestartsww>, one of 10 innovation grants supported by 
theWhat Works to Prevent Violence Against Women <http://www.whatworks.co.za/> 
programme. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.



 