
Spending a gap year in Australia is a traditional rite of passage for many. 
But backpackers are increasingly been lured across the Tasman Sea to New 
Zealand, which offers a significantly better working holiday visa. 
Increasingly, those in the know simply get both visas and switch countries when 
one expires. Finding work in a foreign country can seem daunting but with a 
little prior knowledge and preparation it needn't be difficult.

The working holiday visa

The Working Holiday Scheme Visa 
<http://www.immigration.govt.nz/migrant/stream/work/workingholiday/unitedkingdomworkingholidayscheme.htm>
 (WHSV) allows holders to stay in New Zealand for up to 23 months, working for 
12 months (Australian working holiday visas are initially just for 12 months). 
Holders are able to leave and re-enter New Zealand as often as they wish and 
are allowed to work for one employer for the full 12 months (six in Australia). 
There is also a 12-month WHSV option.

Applicants must be aged between 18 and 30 (although you can apply right up 
until your 31st birthday) and, unlike Australia, you can apply from anywhere in 
the world, including from within New Zealand. You can even enter the country on 
a tourist visa – which lasts for six months, costs nada, and is obtained on 
arrival – and then apply for a WHSV.

On arrival you may be asked for evidence of sufficient funds to support 
yourself – a certified bank statement showing NZ$350 (£132) for each month you 
intend to stay in New Zealand – and a plane ticket onwards, or sufficient funds 
for one. Applications can be made online at theImmigration New Zealand 
<http://www.immigration.govt.nz> website. For UK citizens the visa costs NZ$133 
(£50).

Note: Visa eligibility requirements, costs and entitlements are subject to 
change – check before applying.

Getting there 

Numerous airlines go to the underside of the world, so shop around. The best 
deals are usually found on the internet and going directly to airline websites 
to buy them can prove fruitful. Return tickets can be found for as little as 
£680 (during the Kiwi midwinter, June-August). But expect to pay something in 
the region of £1800 around Christmas (New Zealand's midsummer) when fares 
rocket.

Round-the-world tickets can be good value, and let you see some of the rest of 
the globe en route. Expect to pay between £900 and £1,300 with specialists such 
asSTA Travel <http://www.statravel.co.uk> and Roundtheworldflights.com 
<http://www.Roundtheworldflights.com>. But bear in mind these tickets are 
usually only valid for a year.

Think about making some of the journey overland to reduce the ticket cost. 
Popular options are Delhi to Kathmandu, Brisbane or Sydney to Cairns, or Buenos 
Aires to São Paulo. The majority of international flights land in Auckland, on 
the North Island, or Christchurch, on the South Island. For a return flight, 
the best option is an "open jaw" ticket, by flying into one city and out of the 
other to save back-tracking.

Getting around

New Zealand is a similar size to Britain so getting about is easy. Domestic 
flights can be good value (if booked well in advance), but you'll miss out on 
some spectacular scenery and rack up even more carbon emissions.

New Zealand has limited and not-especially-cheap train services so buses are a 
better option. These offer competitive prices, comprehensive routes and often a 
bit of driver commentary thrown in. Shuttles buses, more common in the South 
Island, offer door-to-door services. Prices on all buses plummet during the low 
season.

Better still, team up with a couple of others and hire or, if you're there for 
more than a few months, buy a car or camper van. This can prove great value - 
the longer you hire for, the cheaper it works out (from NZ$19 a day) – and 
offers that giddy sense of truly independent travel freedom.

This writer can vouch for hitching - while not without inherent risk, it is a 
surprisingly quick way to get around. Plus you'll really get to meet the locals.

Package deals

New Zealand is such an easy place to explore that most package-holiday buses 
will be packed full of older travellers. Alternatively, Kiwi Experience, Stray, 
and lesser so, Magic and Flying Kiwi offer flexible, jump-on-and-off at your 
own pace, activity-packed itineraries. Some have, largely deserved, reputations 
as party buses, but are a good way of meeting people if going solo.

Accommodation

New Zealand has some excellent hostels, hotels and B&Bs, and well-equipped 
campgrounds are numerous (though you might want think twice in winter). Booking 
ahead is essential in December and January however, when the locals are on 
holiday. Many hostels will give you a reduced rate if you stay for a week, 
and/or show them your skills with a broom. But once employed it is generally 
cheaper to look for flat-shares.

Work

Unless you rob a bank, you'll not leave New Zealand with your first million. 
Despite the climbing New Zealand dollar, wages aren't particularly impressive 
and it's best to view the working part of your holiday as a time to breathe 
life back into the empty lungs of your travel fund, and nothing more.

That said, the Kiwi job scene has grown steadily stronger in the last few 
years, and it's a good time to visit. The best bets for gainful employment are 
in tourism and related industries (such as hospitality, where you would expect 
to earn upwards of NZ$18/hour), and agriculture – usually a euphemism for 
fruit-picking, unless you have sheep shearing skills.

Fruit picking is available year-round and pays upwards of NZ$12/hour and 
tourism is booming so nosing about in holiday hotspots could turn up trumps. 
Bear in mind that New Zealand has six ski fields, all in need of temporary 
hospitality workers (and ski instructors). Though vacancies are snapped up 
quickly, so plan ahead. For white-collar work, the larger the city, the better 
the chance of employment; Auckland is the best bet, followed by Wellington and 
Christchurch.

It's worth registering with recruitment agencies and treating job-seeking 
professionally. Rocking up in your shorts and shades will not go down well. Nor 
will a CV scribbled up on a page of your guidebook. Hostel noticeboards, 
newspapers and websites are all good job-seeking recourses, but the traditional 
word-of-mouth method is still likely to bear, er, fruit.

Alternatively, you might be able to get around by working for your board. 
There are organisations likeWWOOF <http://www.wwoof.co.nz> (Willing Workers On 
Organic Farms) who'll place you on a farm to work around four hours a day for 
food and a roof. Some hostels will put you up for free if you offer your 
services as a cleaner.

Money

The cost of living in New Zealand is cheaper than in the UK, but not by a 
great deal. A hostel bed will set you back around NZ$15-25 (£5.60-9.40); a 
beer, around NZ$4 (£1.50). Save money when eating out by choosing Bring Your 
Own (alcohol) restaurants. Joining the YHA and/or VIP hostel organisations will 
save you cash in the long run, too.

In New Zealand, you pay tax on a pay as you earn (PAYE) basis and you'll need 
an IRD number. The PAYE system means there should not be a large refund or an 
amount to pay when you leave. Salaries under NZ$38,000 are taxed at 19.5%.

Tried-and-tested destinations

Most travellers arrive in Auckland and head north to the subtropical Bay of 
Islands, before speeding down the middle of the North Island, calling at 
Rotorua for bubbling mud and geysers, Lake Taupo, Tongariro National Park and 
Wellington. After the ferry crossing, the more scenic South Island is explored 
in a convenient circuit. Kaikoura offers dolphin and seal interactions plus 
whale watching.

Further south brings the dashing Southern Alps and their gleaming lakes into 
view. Hair-whitening Queenstown is the world's adrenalin capital, home of the 
bungy jump and a whole lot more to make you cry, while the plunging fiords of 
Milford Sound are the country's most photographed attraction. A west coast 
roadtrip is one of the world's most spectacular, say Lonely Planet, including 
glaciers you can hike on.

Other destinations

Lakeside Wanaka, an hour from Queenstown, resembles its neighbour 20 years 
ago: highly picturesque, with many of the same adrenalin thrills, but without 
the crowds. Fiordland, a large national park in New Zealand's south-west, 
offers stunning trekking opportunities and is also home to the less-accessible 
Doubtful Sound, far larger than its more-famous relative, Milford.

Staying longer

If you chose a 12-month WHSV, you can extend it for another 11 months – but 
apply before your original visa expires. When the working holiday options are 
exhausted, you can apply for other types of permits, either as a temporary 
worker, student, or resident.
 