
Employees are to be banned from cashing in their workplace pension pot if they 
quit their job after less than two years, ministers have announced. While much 
of the government’s emphasis recently has been on the new “pension freedoms” it 
is introducing to give people more control over their retirement cash, 
ministers have decided to shut the door on an existing freedom that allows some 
people to get back the pension contributions they have paid.

At the moment, a member of a defined contribution (or “money purchase”) 
workplace pension scheme who leaves after more than three months but less than 
two years may be entitled to receive a refund of the contributions they have 
paid in – in some cases with interest on top. This is known as a “short service 
refund”.

The government has announced that from October 2015 this practice will be 
banned 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/further-boost-to-workplace-pension-saving-with-abolition-of-short-service-refunds-from-next-year>
, because ministers are concerned that with people switching jobs more 
regularly, those who keep obtaining refunds will be left with little or nothing 
for their retirement.

Around 20,000 refunds are made each year. Sometimes workers have a choice 
about what happens to their money, while in other cases an employer may insist 
on a refund being taken or a transfer being made to another scheme.

Steve Webb, the pensions minister, said: “The days of people spending their 
entire career with one employer are largely over. Today the average Briton has 
11 different jobs in their lifetime, and we need the rules to reflect this 
reality. If people change jobs regularly and ‘cash out’ their pension each 
time, they stand no chance of building up a decent pension pot.”

The Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> said the new move would “put a 
stop to these refunds, ensuring money saved into a pension scheme stays there 
and is invested for its intended purpose – adding to the saver’s overall 
pension”. It said it was particularly keen to stop people who leave their job 
after less than two years being “pushed into” withdrawing their contributions.

The announcement comes before wider government plans designed to make 
workplace pension saving easier by introducing automatic transfer arrangements 
for people who change employer during the course of their working life. After 
October 2015, a scheme will only be able to give a worker a refund if they quit 
their job within the first month. Final salary pension schemes and personal 
pensions are not affected by the announcement.
 