
When choosing my degree, I decided on product design – which isn't what I do 
now in my role as operations director at a new-media agency. Part-way through, 
I undertook a one-year placement and realised that my vocation was web design.

At this time, in 1999, the commercial internet was still relatively young and 
I was excited to be involved at an early stage. The creativity and innovation 
of this type of design work also really appealed to me. I used this inspiration 
when designing a community website for my dissertation – a move that ended up 
being crucial when it came to finding work.

After leaving university, I knew that my future lay in website design, but I 
needed a portfolio to help me stand out from the crowd. To build up my 
portfolio I did as much freelance work as I could, to demonstrate my potential 
to employers.

Having a creative degree is not enough to get you your first job in any area 
of design. If you want to work in a creative industry, your degree choice is 
helpful, but being able to show examples of your work is more important. Having 
a personal website, designed by you and showcasing your previous work and 
capabilities is also helpful.

After building up my portfolio and website, I applied to work with a few 
companies, whose ads I saw on job sites. One of the first interviews I went for 
was for a graduate in-house position at a large independent company in Crewe. 
The interview process wasn't too technically detailed as although a graduate's 
knowledge should be sufficient, it isn't expected to be exhaustive. What they 
wanted from me was to see my enthusiasm for the role and the industry and a 
willingness to learn. The fact that I had taken the initiative to work 
freelance and set up my own website impressed the interviewers and I was 
offered the job.

From here I decided I wanted to move to agency work. I knew from my sandwich 
placement that working for an agency would not only be exciting, it would also 
give me a variety of experience that I'd be able to take with me anywhere. 
During my first few years of employment I worked with some huge clients 
including Asda, Magnet, Kellogg's and Dixons and I built up an extensive and 
quite impressive portfolio. Working for these types of clients involved hard 
work and long hours but the experience was invaluable.

Although I loved the creativity of web design, I knew that I needed to extend 
my business skills and decided to meet with a PR agency that was setting up a 
digital arm. At the time, digital and new media was the obvious extension of 
traditional agencies and it was exciting to be at the forefront of the 
revolution. Luckily for me, my work got me noticed and I was headhunted by 
First Internet to be its operations director, which is where you'll find me 
today.

My role at First Internet takes into consideration all of my experience: we 
are a full-service digital agency, with expertise in areas such as website 
design through to search-engine optimisation and social-media marketing. My 
past experience as a creative, coupled with the technical knowledge that I've 
built up over the years, allows me to understand the pressures on staff and 
operate in a way that helps them work to their best potential.

I am in charge of recruiting new staff and ensuring that the team is the 
strongest it can be. Technical knowledge is a must for candidates, but I never 
underestimate the benefits of enthusiasm and genuine creativity. Other 
important qualities I look for include an awareness of new technology and an 
eye for detail. A technical or creative degree is great, but it's not the 
be-all and end-all – we've just taken on a part-time college student and he's 
doing great because he has a real talent and interest in the job.

The biggest challenge for the industry as a whole – and the reason why passion 
for the sector is so essential – is keeping up to date with the rapid 
advancement of technology. It is necessary to constantly update yourself to 
keep up with the latest trend or technology and succeed in this field. Self 
improvement is a must for all web designers.

As is the case in any agency, there is no typical day at First Internet, but 
we do try to start each day in a uniform manner, with a scrum meeting so that 
everyone knows what they are working on and where all the projects are up to. 
It is our mantra that clear communication is essential for the smooth running 
of any business.

As operations director, it is important that I'm really hands-on with the 
projects; I account manage many projects myself so that I'm aware of the 
challenges everyone here is facing and I will typically be involved in new 
business meetings and pitches throughout the week. Meeting clients from a huge 
variety of industries and learning about these different industries to produce 
the best possible work for them is both challenging and satisfying.

A degree need not dictate the route a graduate takes – on the contrary, it can 
help you to find what you're good at and what you enjoy, even if it's not the 
subject you choose three years earlier. The most important thing to remember 
when trying to break in to any industry, and especially ours, is that nothing 
rivals passion for the job and sector you see yourself in. As the late SteveJobs
 <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/jobs> said to students at Stanford 
University: "The only way to do great work is to love what you do. If you 
haven't found it yet, keep looking. Don't settle. As with all matters of the 
heart, you'll know when you find it."

Graham Robinson is operations director at Manchester based new media agency 
First Internet <http://www.firstinternet.co.uk>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 