
Maria Sharapova's shriek when she hits the ball is "pretty annoying" and "just 
too loud", according to one of her rivals. The world No8, Agnieszka Radwanska, 
spoke out on Tuesday at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> after her loss to Victoria 
Azarenka, whose high-pitched hoot has also attracted plenty of criticism.

The WTA, which runs the tour, said it is looking at ways to reduce grunting. 
Currently, the umpire can penalize a player for "a deliberate act" of hindrance 
but the rule is rarely enforced when it comes to grunting.

"Of course everybody can make some noise. This is tennis," Radwanska said. 
"But I think it's just too loud. I don't think it's very necessary to scream 
that loud. So if they [the WTA] want to do something, why not?"

During Azarenka's matches in Melbourne, some people in the crowd have been 
mimicking the unusual sound she makes. The host broadcaster, Channel 7, has 
what it calls a "Whoo! Meter" which registered the sound at 91.4 decibels on 
Tuesday.

Grunting in women's tennis has been an issue as far back as the heyday of 
Monica Seles in the 1990s. The outgoing world No1, Caroline Wozniacki, said in 
Octobershe thought "there are some players who do it on purpose" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/25/caroline-wozniacki-wta-maria-sharapova>
.

The WTA issued a statement on Tuesday, saying it is "aware that some fans find 
it bothersome". "We are currently in the process of exploring how to reduce 
excessive grunting, especially for younger players just starting out, without 
adversely affecting players who have developed their game under the current 
training, rules and procedures," the statement said. "We do believe that we 
need to address the concerns expressed by some fans and take a careful look at 
our rules and education policies."

Radwanska said she was used to the noise from Azarenka, but added: "About 
Maria [Sharapova], I mean, what can I say? For sure that is pretty annoying and 
it's just too loud."

Azarenka, who has qualified for her first Australian Open semifinal, said she 
started grunting when she was growing up and needed extra power to hit her 
shots. The 22-year-old Belarusian said she didn't think she and Sharapova "are 
the only players who actually grunt".

"I cannot speak for any others. I only speak for myself," she said. "It's the 
way I am, the way I play. If you want to a little bit more on insight, I think 
it's the way that made me breathe, made me move. It's part of my movement."
 