
The world’s largest steel producer is planning to spend €87m to use a microbe 
originally found in a rabbit’s gut to turn a waste gas that contributes to 
global warming into fuel.

Bioengineering company LanzaTech’s technology will be installed at 
ArcelorMittal’s steel mill in Ghent, Belgium, with the customisedClostridium 
microbe capturing carbon monoxide and converting it into ethanol.

It is anticipated 
<http://corporate.arcelormittal.com/news-and-media/news/2015/july/13-07-2015> 
that the Ghent plant will eventually produce 47,000 tonnes of ethanol a year, 
which can be sold as a byproduct of the steel-making process and used to run 
cars and aeroplanes.

Although carbon monoxide is not considered a direct greenhouse gas, it can 
lead to greater ozone concentrations in the the lowest layer of the atmosphere, 
contributing to climate change. In a steel plant it is burned, releasing CO2,
the main manmade greenhouse gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/feb/04/man-made-greenhouse-gases>.

“What we are talking about is turning an environmental liability into a 
financial opportunity,” said Jennifer Holmgren, chief executive of LanzaTech, 
which is based in Chicago.


Factories using LanzaTech’s technology are also being built in China and 
Taiwan. Whichever comes online earliest will be a world first although the 
system to be built at the factory in Ghent is about 30 times larger than the 
one in China.


Construction of ArcelorMittal’s pilot should start later this year with 
bioethanol production beginning in 2017. If the commercial viability of the 
project is proven the technology would be rolled out across the company’s mills 
globally: it has factories in 19 countries and produced 93.1m tonnes of steel 
in 2014.

“This partnership is an example of how we are looking at all potential 
opportunities to reduce CO2 emissions and support a transition to a lower 
carbon economy,” said Carl Mare, ArcelorMittal’s vice president of innovation.

“Steel is produced through a chemical process that results in high levels of 
waste gases being emitted. This new technology will enable us to convert some 
of these waste gases into fuels that deliver significant environmental impacts.”

Holmgren said: “Today’s announcement is a very big deal for us as 
ArcelorMittal is the biggest steel producer in the world: it makes twice as 
much as its nearest competitor. So this is a serious commitment to a future in 
which more and more power comes from renewables.”
 