
New children's laureate Anthony Browne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-browne> has attempted to calm the 
storm that has blown up among children's authors over a new scheme requiring 
them to be vetted before visiting schools.

Philip Pullman described the vetting scheme as "outrageous, demeaning and 
insulting"to the Guardian on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/10/authors-vet-school-visits> and 
said he wouldn't be appearing in schools again because of it, while former 
children's laureate Anne Fine said it was "demeaning" and "unhealthy", also 
ruling out appearing in UK schools. "It's a sledgehammer to miss a nut," she 
said on Friday.

The Vetting and Barring Scheme is managed by the Independent Safeguarding 
Authority, which was set up in response to the 2002 Soham murders, committed by 
former school caretaker Ian Huntley. It kicks off this October, requiring the 
11.3m people across the education, care and health industries who work with 
children to register – for a £64 fee – on a national database.

Authors including Michael Morpurgo, Quentin Blake and Anthony Horowitz have 
all hit out at the scheme, saying along with Pullman and Fine that it meant 
they wouldn't be appearing in schools in the future. "All of us are constantly 
invited to do tours of schools abroad. If we can no longer enthuse British 
children about reading then I'm happy to go to more sensible places like 
Australia, New Zealand, America, France and Italy," said Fine on Friday.

Pullman, talking on BBC Radio's Today programme this morning, asked why he 
"should have to pay £64 to a government agency to be given a certificate saying 
'I'm not a paedophile'. It's so ludicrous that it's almost funny, but it's not 
funny, it's actually rather dispiriting and sinister."

Browne, however, has taken a more sanguine approach to news of the scheme. "I 
feel that as writers we shouldn't necessarily be granted an exemption," he 
said. "If all people who work with children have to be vetted by the police 
then we shouldn't be an exception. It seems a bit odd that we have to pay for 
it, though."

Gillian Cross, author of The Demon Headmaster, agreed with Browne, telling the 
Bookseller that anything that could be done to stop child abuse was worth it. 
"I understand entirely why people are enraged about the whole child abuse 
suspicion frenzy, which is particularly hard on men. It is nevertheless true 
that many children are abused. Theirs is the real suffering, and if checking 
can help to prevent that, I'm not opposed to it," Cross said.

And posting on the Bookseller's website, children's author Robert Muchamore 
wrote that accusations that the scheme was "a stealth tax, or part of some 
Orwellian state apparatus that puts a barrier between children and adults is 
absurdly over the top".

"You pay £64, they run a criminal records check and you get a piece of paper 
to say that you have no prior convictions related to mistreatment of children. 
It isn't a cure for child abuse, but it does create a barrier to stop past 
offenders working with kids. That seems perfectly reasonable to me," he wrote, 
adding on Twitter that he was "irritated at another round of whinging by the 
usual grey-haired mafia of 'renowned' kids' authors".
 