
Born: Time unknown, 12 May 2005

Place of birth: Mulago hospital, Kampala

Birth weight: 3.8kg

Mother: Deborah Kukiriza

Father: Robert Sebulidde Kukiriza

Baby Wyclif is a month old and in trouble. He is healthy and loved, but both 
parents are HIV-positive and weakening and neither is receiving anti-retroviral 
drugs.

His father, Robert, is earning less and less as a bus driver, and his mother, 
Deborah, feels constantly sick and has had to give up her work in a local 
school. There is next to no food in the house. The rent is overdue. The 
neighbours are being beastly and Deborah's two eldest children have had to be 
taken out of school.

There is a terrible predictability about what will happen to the Kukiriza 
family next unless things change rapidly.

In a few months, Robert will probably have to give up work, and without a 
regular income, however small, they will have to move from the well-built, 
rented one-room house where they have lived for three years.

Instead of their new tin roof, electricity, an old black and white television, 
linoleum on the floor, a fan and good quality water outside, they will probably 
have to go to Deborah's mother's cramped house in one of the nearby slum 
districts of Kawempe, where the living conditions for their family will be far 
more difficult.

But it is far worse than that. Robert will probably die within a year or two 
and Deborah's health will not improve. Both parents know that unless they get 
drugs they will not see their children grow up.

Both now live only for their children. They are quite realistic.

"I know my health status," says Deborah. "I can see ahead. The time will come 
when Robert and I are not there for Wyclif or the other children. They will 
become orphans."

The four children will not be alone. Uganda is being devastated by HIV/Aids, 
with at least 2 million people affected and roughly 2.3 million orphans - some 
20% of all children under 15 years old.

An entire generation of children is being sent back to their parents' villages 
or to distant relatives; others are being looked after by churches. But many of 
them will end up as street children, and tens of thousands of households are 
headed by children who will never go to school and who can only expect to be 
exploited.

With luck, Wyclif who is HIV-negative because he was delivered by caesarean 
section, will be well looked after by one of Robert's relations, and will go to 
primary school, where he should learn to read, write and count. The schooling 
will be free and basic, but he will still need money for materials. As an 
orphan, his chances of going on to secondary school are almost nil.

In the back of her mind, Deborah knows that Wyclif could just as easily join 
the growing army of unskilled, uneducated, exploited young Ugandan men who live 
from hand to mouth, get ill and die young. It is something she fears.

But that is the future. For now, the Kukiriza family lives one day at a time.

"I am waiting for Robert to come home. It will probably be late," Deborah 
says. "He starts at five in the morning and gets back about 10 at night. He has 
to pay 40,000 shillings (£13) a day for the use of the bus. Sometimes he comes 
back with the equivalent of 50p. If he does not make the money he must make it 
up the next day.

"Each day there is less and less [money]," Deborah says. "He is very 
supportive, but he often gets ill. He gets chest pains and coughs and skin 
rashes. I fear for us.

"When he can no longer drive the matatu [minibus], there will be nothing 
coming in.

"I just hope that I will be able to go back to work at the school, and that 
baby Wyclif will get enough [formula] milk. I cannot breastfeed him, because of 
the illness. We don't have enough money to buy milk and I do not know how long 
the milk the hospital gave us will last.

"The children eat once a day on average. Yesterday we ate beans and banana. 
Today they will get no food, at all, just tea. Nowadays we eat when the money 
comes in. My mother helps a little bit, but she cannot do much.

"The problem here in Kampala is always poverty. This is a poor country and an 
expensive city. You need money for everything now.

"The [anti-retroviral] drugs are available and the government says they are 
free, but they are not. They cost us 30,000 (£9.50) a month, and where do we 
get that kind of money? And for them to work properly, we need nutritious food. 
That costs a lot, too."

So she and Robert have to help themselves and rely on the community. As the 
illness develops they can expect to go to somewhere like the nearby 
Tusitukirewamu (United We Stand) group, one of the many groups in Uganda that 
specialise in assisting HIV/Aids sufferers. There they can learn in workshops 
how to make ointments, soaps, syrups and creams from herbal plants to help to 
relieve some Aids symptoms.

But that is in the future, and Deborah lives in hope of help, work, of a 
future for Wyclif, and dignity for her family.

"My father also came to the city 30 years ago, but he died when I was very 
young. I so want my children not to be in the same situation that I was. That's 
why education is the great hope of people like me. That is the way out of 
poverty and illness. That is why we have to live in hope so much."

 Factfile: Uganda

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 82

Population on under $2 a day:  96.4%

Debt per capita:  $75

Life expectancy:  46.2

% children in education (F/M): 68/73

• This article was corrected on 17 September 2010 to correct the spelling of 
the child's name from Wycliffe to Wyclif.
 