
Andy Flower and his under-fire England management have received fresh 
criticism from Yorkshire for their treatment of Joe Root andJonny Bairstow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-bairstow>.

Martyn Moxon, the county's director of cricket, believes Root's Ashes tour was 
undermined by England's apparent uncertainty over where he should bat, leading 
to his surprise omission from the fifth Test in Sydney.

But he has been especially annoyed by the criticism Bairstow has received for 
failing to make an impact in the last two Tests after he was called up to 
replace Matt Prior – pointing out that the 24-year-old was thrown in at the 
deep end after wicketkeeping in only one tour match during the previous two 
months.

"I don't get it, all the criticism Jonny is copping at the minute," said 
Moxon. "People need to look into the circumstances behind him not performing as 
well as we know he can. He needs to play regular cricket. He can't be sat 
watching and having loads of nets."

Bairstow fell rapidly down the England pecking order after playing the first 
four Tests of the home Ashes series, as it quickly became apparent in Australia 
that Flower and the other selectors had decided hisYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> team-mate Gary Ballance was a 
better bet to bat at No6.

However, they then changed tack again after the opening tour fixture in Perth, 
when Michael Carberry capitalised on an unexpected chance after Alastair Cook's 
back condition flared up. There was still no reprieve for Bairstow, but Root 
suddenly found himself dropping down into the middle order for the second tour 
match in Hobart, and Carberry opening with Cook.

After one match at No6, Root then moved back up to No3 following Jonathan 
Trott's abrupt departure after the Brisbane Test, and he was then dropped 
altogether for the fifth Test in Sydney.

"They've got to find the right place for Joe to bat," said Moxon. "For me 
hopefully that will be opener, because that's what he does. But he needs to be 
given time, and not shifted up and down the order."

Root has stayed in Australia with England's one-day squad whereas Bairstow 
will head for Sri Lanka at the end of the month as one of two specialists 
wickekeepers, with Ben Foakes of Essex, in the England Lions squad.
 