
Indian ratatouille (V)

A great ratatouille is one in which the vegetables interact with each other, 
but are still discernible from each other. The trick is to cook them just 
right: not over, not under. Panch phoran is an east Indian whole seed mix – you 
can make it yourself by mixing equal amounts of fenugreek, fennel, black 
mustard, nigella and cumin. Serves four to six.

120ml sunflower oil
2 red onions, peeled and cut into 3cm dice (340g)
2 charlotte potatoes, peeled and cut into 3cm dice (250g)
½ butternut squash, peeled and cut into 3cm dice (500g)
1 aubergine, cut into 3cm dice (240g)
1 red pepper, cut into 3cm dice (150g)
1½ tbsp panch phoran
¼ tsp ground turmeric
5 cardamom pods
2 courgettes, cut into 3cm dice (280g)
250g green beans (or okra), trimmed
2 tomatoes, peeled and chopped (160g)
3 green chillies, finely chopped
10-12 curry leaves
2 tsp caster sugar
3 tbsp tamarind paste
Salt
4 tbsp lightly toasted pumpkin seeds 
Chopped coriander leaves, to serve

Heat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Heat the oil in a large sauté pan, add 
the onion, potato and squash, and fry on medium-high heat for 10 minutes. Lift 
out with a slotted spoon and set aside. Add the aubergine to the pan, fry for 
eight minutes, then transfer to the other cooked veg.

Top up the oil, if necessary – you need two tablespoons in the pan. Add the 
pepper and spices, and fry on high heat for three minutes, stirring. Add the 
courgettes, beans (or okra), tomatoes, chilli and curry leaves, and fry for 
five minutes on high heat. Return the cooked vegetables to the pan, add the 
sugar, tamarind and 200ml water, and simmer for five minutes. Season with salt 
to taste.

Spread the mix on a baking tray, sprinkle over the pumpkin seeds and bake for 
12 minutes. Serve sprinkled with coriander.

Tuna confit salad

This is inspired by a Tunisian tuna sandwich called fricassée. Good tinned 
tuna is fine if you don't fancy the preserving process. Serves four.

4 rosemary sprigs
4 bay leaves
3 tbsp black peppercorns
400ml extra-virgin olive oil
300g tuna steak
600g desiree potatoes, peeled and cut into 2cm pieces
½ tsp turmeric
Salt
20g anchovies, roughly chopped
3 tbsp harissa paste
4 tbsp capers
2 tsp preserved lemon skin, finely chopped
60g black olives, pitted and halved
2 tbsp lemon juice
140g preserved piquillo peppers, torn into rough strips
4 free-range eggs, hard-boiled, peeled and quartered
140g little gem lettuce leaves, torn
20g parsley, leaves picked and torn 

Put the rosemary, bay and peppercorns in a saucepan, add the oil and heat to 
just below boiling point. Add the tuna (it must be covered; if not, heat more 
oil and top up). Remove from the heat, set aside to cool, then refrigerate for 
at least 24 hours.

Boil the potatoes and turmeric in salted water for 10-12 minutes. Drain and 
put the potatoes in a large bowl. While the spuds are still hot, add the 
anchovies, harissa, capers, preserved lemon, olives and some salt, along with 
90ml of the tuna oil and some of the peppercorns. Mix and leave to cool.

Remove the tuna from the oil, break into bite-sized chunks and add to the 
salad. Add the lemon juice, peppers, eggs, lettuce and parsley, toss gently, 
taste and adjust the salt. Add more oil if need be, and serve.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com/> in London.
 