
If there's one area of UK business that looks recession-proof right now, it's 
the digital sector. Against a backdrop ofrising unemployment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/17/uk-unemployment-rise-pressure-osborne-austerity>
, digital media and marketing has grown into a multi-billion pound industry.

Digital careers cross a range of sectors – from retail and professional 
services to not-for-profit and education. Yet many older professionals feel 
locked out of opportunities which may seem better suited to digital natives – 
people who've grown up with technology. But there are still many digital career 
options out there for older jobseekers.

Here are a few strategies to help you gain confidence and improve your job 
prospects in the expanding digital economy.

Leave your fears at the door

A fearless attitude is not a trait confined to young people. But being 
unfamiliar with technology can scare people off applying to digital roles.

Not having grown up tweeting can be an advantage. In fact, being a novice can 
give you valuable insight into the usability of a product – and you'll probably 
pick things up faster than you think. In the social media arena, networks like 
Tumblr, Facebook and Twitter are becoming important business tools, and you 
have everything to gain by getting on board. Olivier Binse, director of 
strategy for telecoms and media at Deloitte, says: "What matters is to embed a 
culture of observation and learning to experiment and test different 
approaches." That openness to experimenting with new technology doesn't have an 
age limit.

Audit yourself

The market moves fast, so don't pigeonhole yourself. Across industries, 
distinctions are collapsing and there's room to be inventive with your job 
title if you're confident in your core skills. Roles like SEO analyst, content 
technologist, and social media manager didn't even exist a few years ago.

These positions play on the strength of evergreen skills like analytics, 
writing and communications. Look at what other people who are now in digital 
roles used to do – they may have switched from customer services to customer 
engagement, from statistician to digital data analyst.

There's no reason why you can't augment your current role with a little extra 
training and imagination. You might also bring to the table skills from outside 
of work. Do you write a blog? Perhaps you run a Facebook page for a local 
organisation?

When planning your next steps, focus on what is important to you – your 
values, interest and ambition. Successful careers are built around a genuine 
passion for what you do.

Play to your strengths

As well as tech-savvy coders and designers, companies need people who can see 
the bigger commercial picture. Experienced professionals will often already 
have at least some of the skills required by employers in the digital sector.

Here are three areas where you could prove that older is wiser:

1. Communications and leadership

Leadership improves with practice and recruiters for senior digital roles look 
for traditional management skills and experience. Employers will value a track 
record of balancing the daily demands of scheduling and management, in parallel 
with developing longer-term priorities.

Teams also need good communicators not just for internal efficacy but also to 
influence and educate people about digital strategy. The ability to demonstrate 
diplomacy and the enthusiasm to motivate staff will be appealing for any senior 
digital position.

2. Analytics

Measurement is a critical aspect of the digital sector, with businesses 
striving to justify their campaigns and budgets. Analytics is an area for 
accountants, engineers and statisticians to transfer technical and 
detail-oriented skills to a digital environment. Data is used to inform many 
decisions, from marketing to business strategy, so by developing your 
analytical skills, you can add real value to your company.

3. Commercial awareness

In a digital world of almost instant action and reaction, the ability to see 
the wider business implications of a digital strategy – in marketing or 
e-commerce, for example – is a real bonus. Commercial experience online and 
offline is relevant.

Claire Higgins, head of digital marketing at Selfridges, looks for recruits 
with "a background from a range of sectors to bring fresh perspectives, 
knowledge and experience." She says they should be "informed about competitors, 
commercial in orientation, able to identify and deliver the customer and 
business benefits". This plays to the strengths of more experienced 
professionals from other industries that are looking to make a career change 
into the digital world.

Polish up

You need to get passionate about your career change and immerse yourself in 
it. This could include courses, training and events which will help you compete 
in the jobs market. Short-courses and workshops are widely available – even 
online. Training can help you get to grips with technology, provide an 
intensive introduction to a new sector, and complement existing skills. You can 
cultivate your interests by experimenting with new technologies, reading 
industry journals, news sites and blogs, and by observing everyday trends.

Don't be scared to learn new things and to look for value in skills you 
already have. Older jobseekers can succeed in a digital world. They can thrive 
by applying experience to new roles, up-skilling, and approaching the next 
career move with confidence.

Ashley Friedlein is the chief executive of Econsultancy 
<http://econsultancy.com>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
 