
You might think that Lehman Brothers' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> boss, Dick Fuld, would be 
chastened by presiding over the bankruptcy of one of Wall Street's most 
distinguished banks. He isn't.

Wearing an unapologetic scowl, Fuld spent three hours explaining to Congress 
this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2008/oct/07/richard.fuld.congress.lehman>
 why it wasn't his fault that a 158-year-old institution evaporated under his 
watch. In scattergun fashion, he blamed the Federal Reserve, naked 
short-sellers, a "systemic" lack of confidence, media sensationalising and 
inconsistent regulation.

"Not that anyone on this committee cares about this but I wake up every single 
night wondering what I could have done differently," barked Fuld at one point. 
He usually manages to go back to sleep, though, because he thinks all his 
decisions were "prudent and appropriate" given the information he had at the 
time.

A day later, the House oversight committee heard a similar refrain from the 
two men who ran the world's biggest insurance company, AIG, in the months 
before it had to beg the US government for an $85bn (£50bn) loan to stay in 
business.

Using tortured logic, AIG's erstwhile chief executive, Robert Willumstad, and 
his British-born predecessor, Martin Sullivan, tried to offload responsibility 
by blaming the rules of accounting for the firm's near collapse.

The principle of mark-to-market accounting, complained Willumstad, forced AIG 
to write off billions of dollars of unrealised losses on obscure investments in 
swaps and derivatives because the things were rendered unsale-able when the 
credit markets froze.

"Looking back on my time as CEO, I don't believe AIG could have done anything 
differently," Willumstad said. "The market seizure was an unprecedented global 
catastrophe."

This shrugging of expensively tailored shoulders is pretty unsavoury stuff. It 
begs a simple question – where does the buck stop in business if a chief 
executive can keep a straight face while disclaiming all responsibility for the 
collapse of a major corporation?

The absurd sums earned by Wall Street figures are well trodden ground – Fuld 
agreed to the committee that he had pocketed somewhere between $250m and $350m 
over the last eight years - and in terms of public esteem, corporate bosses are 
held somewhere close to arsonists.
One email circulating this week 
<http://community.marketwatch.com/groups/us-politics/topics/ceo---chief-embezzlement-officer>
 offered a spoof glossary of terms for the global financial crisis. It 
suggested that CEO stands for "chief embezzlement officer" while CFO means 
"corporate fraud officer".

None of the men before Congress this week spent much time addressing the 
fundamental fault which led to the present debacle – an excess of reckless 
financial risk-taking by banks and financial firms in search of short-term 
gains.

Lehman was one of Wall Street's biggest and earliest enthusiasts for sub-prime 
mortgages, dabbling as far back as the late 1990s. It paid insufficient 
attention to the underlying values of the properties backing these loans – a 
straightforward failure of judgement and of management. In its earnings for the 
three months to August, which proved to be the bank's final straw, Lehman lost 
$3.9bn after taking a $5.3bn hit on the value of its portfolio of residential 
mortgages. Whose fault was that?

Similarly, AIG delved into insurance policies intended to protect clients 
against the risk of default on mortgage-related derivatives. Senior bosses 
allowed a London-based unit specialising in these policies to run out of 
control. Since the credit markets seized up, AIG has had to write off an 
eye-watering $25.9bn on its exposure to bad debts, according to evidence put 
before Congress.

The chorus from the boardrooms of financial institutions is that these types 
of write-downs do not represent real losses but merely an unintended 
consequence of a book-keeping rule, FAS 157, which requires investments to be 
stated at a snapshot of their present sale-able value.

"When there is no market, the value of securities based on FAS 157 becomes 
somewhat difficult and requires a certain amount of judgement," said 
Willumstad, who ran AIG for just three months in the run-up to its bail-out. 
"It obviously resulted in substantial write-downs which were, obviously, not 
helpful to the company."

For mere mortals, this is a baffling argument. Carolyn Maloney, a Democratic 
congresswoman from New York, sounded as if she couldn't quite believe what she 
was hearing.

"You were just gambling billions, possibly trillions of dollars," she said. 
"You blame accountants for coming forward, looking at the accounts and saying 
something has no value because nobody in the entire world wants to buy it."

A former chief accountant at the Securities and Exchange Commission, Lynn 
Turner, echoed this critique, telling the committee that AIG's attempt to blame 
accounting rules was "like blaming the thermometer for a fever".

There was much mealy-mouthed waffle from dethroned executives about how pained 
they are at recent events. Fuld, who is nicknamed "the gorilla", said he felt 
"horrible". Sullivan declared himself "heartbroken". Willumstad didn't 
articulate his feelings, although he at least felt obliged to turn down a $22m 
golden parachute for three months' work.

Perhaps a bit of further reflection would help. Instead of a payoff, how about 
an alternative farewell to departing executives? They should all be sent on a 
yogic retreat, perhaps to an ashram somewhere in India, to meditate and 
contemplate on how it all went wrong. Maybe when they get back, they'll be 
ready to say sorry.
 