
Normally when newspapers get wrong the story of my conversations with Robin 
Cook about the end of his marriage, it is to say I asked him to choose between 
his wife and his lover. A new version appears in youreditorial on scientist Tim 
Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/30/the-guardian-view-on-the-tim-hunt-affair-an-explosive-combination-of-science-sexism-and-social-media>
 (1 July), where you state that I called Robin at Heathrow “to tell him he had 
to choose between his job and his lover”. Neither version is accurate. As my 
diaries make clear, what I said, when he asked for my advice about how to 
handle the News of the World inquiries which had come to me, was that he should 
seek “clarity” about the intentions in his private life, and that I had 
persuaded the newspaper not to approach anyone else until the next day. This 
was advice given as much as a friend as a media manager.

The Guardian view on the Tim Hunt affair: an explosive combination of science, 
sexism and social media | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/30/the-guardian-view-on-the-tim-hunt-affair-an-explosive-combination-of-science-sexism-and-social-media>
Even more strangely, your editorial also talks of this as “the 
pre-social-media-era dumping of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> foreign secretary”, suggesting he 
lost his job. He did not, as surely any senior Guardian journalist would know. 
Indeed included in the account of those initial phone calls was my passing on 
an assurance from the prime minister that he did not see the affair per se as a 
resigning issue. Robin remained as foreign secretary, later became Commons 
leader, and when he finally resigned over Iraq we had another set of friendly 
discussions about how to handle this, because though he could not support the 
government position, he did not want to inflict huge political damage on Tony 
Blair. As I wrote in my diary, since published, “(Robin) said we had been 
through some very difficult times together and he always valued my advice and 
support. He said there was something oddly fitting about the fact we had worked 
so closely at the end of his marriage and were working so closely again at the 
end of his ministerial career.”

Given the fond place that Robin holds in the hearts of many Guardian readers, 
I hope you can publish this letter by way of clarification.
Alastair Campbell
Former Downing Street press secretary
 