
Born: 12 February 2005

Place of birth: Muhimbile hospital, Dar es Salaam

Birth weight:  3.1kg

Mother:  Rehema Richard Abu, 20

Father: Salehe Abu, 20

Zainab Abu is just the latest addition to one of Dar es Salaam's larger 
families. She will grow up in a household of at least 20 people, including 11 
uncles and aunts under the age of 18, four cousins, a formidable grandmother 
and two great grandparents whose 13 other children and their families all live 
nearby.

But the Abu tribe has little beyond strength in numbers. Their home, 
self-built on land squatted on in Tabata Kisiwant district, 20 years ago, is 
collapsing and there are gaping holes in the walls where water rushes off a 
slope. No one in the family has regular work, and in hard times such as now, 
the young Abu children are farmed out to other family members who are doing 
better in the city or in the countryside.

"We know that we are very poor. Of course we don't like to live like this," 
says Granny Hadya. "We see that others are far better off than we are. When you 
see pictures of America or Britain, then we too wish for a better life. What's 
a better life? It's having work, isn't it? And there isn't any here. Poverty is 
getting worse and everything is more expensive now."

"Water is the worst problem," says Zainab's mother, Rehema. "There is either 
too much or too little. The shallow well a few hundred yards away is expensive 
and bad quality, and the house floods when it rains."

Salehe tries to get labouring work on the many building sites. But he is lucky 
to get two or three days a week and just $2 a day. To make ends meet, Granny 
Hadya sells the occasional sack of charcoal or length of cloth, and great 
grandmother Mwajabu, who used to sell fish, digs sand for builders.

Ignorance is the cause of all their woes, says Hadya. "We don't get any better 
work because we have no education. That's the only way out of this family's 
poverty," she adds confidently. Only one of her 11 children finished primary 
school, and none went to secondary school.

Schooling is difficult and expensive, she says. A Tanzanian girl gets an 
average of just two years' education, a boy slightly more. The state system is 
nominally free until the age of 12, but schools are hopelessly overcrowded, the 
teachers can barely cope and private education is way out of reach for the Abu 
family.

But Rehema is fiercely ambitious for baby Zainab. "I want Zainab to be a 
doctor or a nurse. For that she needs a good education. My husband will just 
have to earn more money," she says.

"And I would like to go to Europe," she adds.

"What for?" asks her mother-in-law, shocked.

"Because life is good there. It's cold but I'm told it's better than in 
America. We watch TV in someone's house and we see for ourselves."

She is Christian, her husband is Muslim, but it makes no difference, says 
Rehema. Last year they had an enormous wedding celebration, but they still 
haven't found the money to get the pictures developed.

Then Zainab was born and they moved into a small 8ft-square house which the 
family has built them round the back of the main house. Salehe has decorated it 
with pictures of David Beckham, Snoop Dogg and European girl bands.

The rain pours in through the roof and the pit latrine outside smells. But at 
least they have a mosquito net for baby Zainab.

"One day things will be better," says Rehema. "One day we will all have work. 
I know."

Factfile: Tanzania

Under-5s mortality (per 1,000 births): 104

Population on under $2 a day: 59.7%

Debt per capita: $61

Life expectancy: 43.3

% children in education (F/M): 31/32
 