
Prosper Mumba, aged just five, was asked by his father to define the word 
hypocrite. The boy did not hesitate: "A person who is bad pretending to be 
good," he said. It's too early to be certain that an appreciation of good and 
evil runs in the Mumba family genes, but it would not be surprising. Prosper's 
grandfather was a preacher and his dad is the Rev Joseph V Mumba, vicar of the 
Church in the Rock in Lusaka, situated in one of the poorest slums of the 
Zambian capital. Young Prosper already goes to his father's Bible classes and 
is learning at his knee. "Perhaps he got it there. He is a smart boy," said 
Mumba, with pride.

"He's short but cute. He's in kindergarten, but he can already explain 
difficult things in his own words. Within a month of going to school they put 
him up a grade."

The Mumba family of seven is doing well, too, reflecting the surge of 
confidence and the rise of the middle classes that has taken place in many 
African cities in the last five years.

Churches are also booming in the slums of sub-Saharan Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and five years ago Joseph Mumba tied 
his family fortunes to the poorest in the community, asking them to contribute 
food and small sums of money to keep his family. He considered setting up in a 
richer area which would have earned him more, but he decided, as an act of 
faith, not to.

If Zambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zambia> prospered, he reasoned, 
then baby Prosper would, too. "It was hard to start with. Our congregation of 
100 people gave us what they could but there were real financial problems."

Mumba now has 200 parishioners and his congregation is building a larger 
church that will seat 800 people.

"I think it will only grow. I am sure we will fill it," he said.

His ambition stretches into his home life. In 2005 he and his wife, Bertha, 
were renting a three-bedroom house in the middle class Lusaka suburb of 
Chilanje for their five children. Bertha was working as a teacher in a private 
school but she has given that up to look after the family. "We have bought a 
new place now. It's ours. It's about the same size in the same area. Prosper is 
definitely the last child we have," he said.

He says that Lusaka is changing dramatically, with a building boom and 
increasing numbers of people flooding in from the rural areas. "People want to 
have their own houses. They are trying to find land with the idea of building 
on it. It's leading to a renewal of the community. I think it's a good thing," 
he added.

Zambia's progress on the millennium development goals has been slow. It 
remains one of the world's poorest countries, with high birth rates, low life 
expectancy, rampant HIV/Aids and dangerously high maternal and infant mortality 
levels. The lack of clean water and sanitation is acute and is leading to tens 
of thousands of infant deaths a year.

At the present rate, it will take Zambia more than 150 years to meet the UN 
MDG target to halve the proportion of people who have access to sanitation.The 
Mumba family say they are in the frontline of the health and poverty crisis, 
with the slums now as bad as rural areas for unemployment, sanitation and 
nutrition. "There was greatly increased hunger and poverty in 2008 when food 
prices soared [with the oil price rise], and progress has been slow in the 
health and education services," said Mumba. For two years the economy has been 
very difficult. We were heading in the right direction but now we feel we have 
gone backwards. Corruption is now very bad and government has not got to grips 
with it. "The politicians always say the right things but on the ground we see 
nothing changing," Mumba said.

Factfile: Zambia

Under-fives mortality (per 1,000 births): 148

Population on under $2 (£1.28) a day: 81.52%

Debt per capita: $53.89 (£34.48)

Life expectancy: 48

% children in education (F/M): 87.5/98.4
 