
There's a saying that in theatre, you don't notice good lighting. For Anthony 
Rose <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-rose>, the former head of BBC 
iPlayer, there's a similar principle around technology – particularly when that 
technology is driving an industry-defining online TV service.

iPlayer was a very different beast when Rose joined the BBC in September 2007. 
Though technically accomplished, it was a tool built very much in the image of 
the team that made it rather than the mainstream audience it was intended for, 
he says. "If you make things for geeks, they are super-satisfied but the real 
audience isn't. So we brought in people who love EastEnders and Waterloo Road 
to tell us what they like, from usability to navigation, and quickly discovered 
what they did and didn't want." It took four rounds of testing the service on 
ladies from theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> legal department 
(and a few boxes of chocolates) to get the service releasable, with each 
iteration improving five key issues.

Rose came from startups — including geek favourite P2P network KaZaA — to join 
the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/sep/17/digitalmedia.bbc?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
and at the time friends questioned how "a dotcom kid" would survive our 
monolithic national treasure, he recalls. He describes his role as 75% cool 
stuff, 20% the cost of doing business and 5% bad stuff — not dissimilar to a 
startup. "When I arrived iPlayer was pre-release and not a wonderful consumer 
proposition. I didn't know why it hadn't turned out right, or what needed to be 
done. It turned out that the developers were brilliant, but the problem was 
that the BBC had so many internal stakeholders all pulling in different 
directions." From financial pressure to reduce bandwidth use to editorial 
standards and parental controls, everyone had a say in the project — apart from 
consumers.

That says a lot about the BBC; despite its prowess in tech research and 
development, there is a lack of understanding of product, sa ys Rose. It's not 
a problem specific to the BBC, but a feature of big organisations that they 
often struggle to make decisions, he says.His relentless focus on product is 
credited with ensuring iPlayer's success, growing from launch to 130m monthly 
streams in May 2010, when he moved to another internet TV specialist role as
chief technical officer at YouView 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/22/youview-chief-anti-competitive?INTCMP=SRCH>
. By December 2012 it had reached a record 217m streams.

By February 2011 Rose was out on his own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/dec/08/anthony-rose-leaves-youview?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and hungry to head back to the autonomy and opportunity of the startup world, 
having turned down inevitable offers from other big media organisations. 
Match-made with former EMI president Ernesto Schmitt, Rose pulled together a 
crack team of developers — many of whom came from the BBC, and most of whom 
initially worked for nothing — to build a prototype for a second screen TV 
service. The team of eight worked from shared offices in Old Street, secured 
$6m in private investment, and by November 2011 the first incarnation of Zeebox 
launched.

In person, Rose exudes a gentle, bubbling enthusiasm for his work. He talks 
quickly, intensely and very coherently, as if his mind had been synthesising 
ideas and observations overnight, presentation ready. Zeebox, he explains, is 
about the conversation around TV, and making that conversation accessible on 
mobile, tablet or through a browser. It offers programme information, 
discussion on social media, and targeted advertising.

From the outset, they decided, the concept had to avoid the precondition of 
partnerships with smart TV manufacturers. Why, despite the promise of Zeebox 
and a wave of other services perfect for internet-connected TV, have smart 
(internet-connected) TVs so far proved so disappointing? "Manufacturers had a 
dream that they would no longer be a dumb pipe, and looked to Apple's 30% 
commission on app sales to try and do the same to TV listings," he says. "But 
broadcasters won't be disaggregated or forced to pay a fee to manufacturers. It 
has meant that smart TVs will have two brains, one for content and one for 
apps, until a new player comes in and disrupts the market to give consumers 
what they want."

Zeebox, he explains, can't reconcile that standoff with manufacturers. But it 
was also never intended to disrupt the TV space, recognising from the start 
that it would need to partner with broadcasters. "If you look at the people who 
start new ventures, do they have a religious zeal to change the world, or do 
they want to disrupt? If your goal is purely to disrupt I think that's naive, 
because if your business requires deals with those incumbents they will never 
be your friend. Don't try to fix other people's problems, because they might 
not want them fixed."

Rose is also back round the table with the broadcasters he dealt with during 
his iPlayer days, when the tenor of conversation was rather different. "I had 
fairly robust conversations with some of these broadcasters when I wanted 
content in the iPlayer, and needed them to change their rights and allow it. It 
made for some pretty interesting dinner conversation."

A month after launch, BSkyB approached Zeebox and took a 10% stake understood 
to be worth at least $15m, giving Zeebox "the capital and credibility to 
develop the UK proposition". Next came the US launch in September 2012, with 
launch partners including Comcast, NBC and Viacom, and Australia, with Channel 
Ten, the following month.

Television, Rose contends, has been the same for decades. Despite incremental 
improvements with colour and then HD, the essential dynamic of beaming 
programmes to millions of people remains the same. The Zeebox vision he pitches 
is one built on five principles of connected TV: programme discovery and social 
recommendation; programme information; participation, which could mean 
influencing the narrative of the programme rather than asynchronously 
commenting; and shopping, with a compelling case for click-to-buy that could be 
lucrative for Zeebox.

He won't say when it expects to start seeing a profit, but this month Zeebox 
introduces its ad platform. Using a fingerprinting system to recognise ads 
playing on a TV stream, it can offer ads that synchronise each TV slot with 
Zeebox on mobile, tablet or the web. Broadcasters can partner and offer those 
slots to their own advertisers on a revenue share, or Zeebox sells them to 
other advertisers.

Ambitions are firmly fixed on cracking the US where TV advertising is worth 
$65bn annually, according to Group M. "TV ads are monetised at 0.5c to 1c per 
view, but Google is monetised at 50c per click on the internet, and that's 
targetable and measurable," says Rose. "Second screen will either be seen as 
digital, divorced from TV, or as TV plus plus, online and synchronised. We've 
had overwhelming interest from advertisers at the highest level."

The pièce de résistance, if Zeebox can pull it off, will be to layer all this 
functionality around on-demand programmes. The team has figured out how to 
re-present timestamped comments from the original broadcast, though how any 
further interaction will work has yet to be determined. That catchup experience 
is just a few weeks away, Rose promises.

It's impossible to talk about his work without discussing his time at the BBC, 
which set him on the path to being one of the most authoritative figures in 
connected TV. But while he's gracious about former colleagues, he's not 
confident that the BBC — despite its heritage of excellence in engineering — is 
committed to exploring the technology that will define its future.

"The Delivering Quality First programme has pulled the focus back to making 
content, and I don't subscribe to that. In the future, people will have to 
watch and discover that content in the new ways, and while iPlayer is fantastic 
at discovery on multiple devices, the technology will keep moving. Consumers 
are moving off the schedule, and if you're not plugged in to how they are doing 
that, then you're not leading on it.

"The pendulum is swinging away from tech innovation toward content – and 
that's the opposite of what the BBC's competitors are doing."
 